Morgan Kaufmann Publishers is an imprint of Elsevier
30 Corporate Drive, Suite 400
Burlington, MA 01803

                                         
This book is printed on acid-free paper. ⬁

Copyright © 2009 by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks or
registered trademarks. In all instances in which Morgan Kaufmann Publishers is aware of a claim, the
product names appear in initial capital or all capital letters. Readers, however, should contact the
appropriate companies for more complete information regarding trademarks and registration.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, scanning, or otherwise, without prior written
permission of the publisher.

Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Science & Technology Rights Department in
Oxford, UK: phone: (+44) 1865 843830, fax: (+44) 1865 853333, e-mail: permissions@elsevier.com.
You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier homepage (http://elsevier.com), by
selecting “Support & Contact” then “Copyright and Permission” and then “Obtaining Permissions.”

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Application submitted.

ISBN-13: 978-0-12-374515-6



 For information on all Morgan Kaufmann publications,
 visit our Website at www.books.elsevier.com



Printed in the United States
08 09 10 11 12 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Foreword

In Federalist 51, James Madison wrote:“If men were angels, no government would
be necessary.” If he lived today, Madison might have written: “If software devel-
opers were angels, debugging would be unnecessary.” Most of us, however, make
mistakes, and many of us even make errors while designing and writing software.
Our mistakes need to be found and ﬁxed, an activity called debugging that origi-
nated with the ﬁrst computer programs. Today every computer program written
is also debugged, but debugging is not a widely studied or taught skill. Few books,
beyond this one, present a systematic approach to ﬁnding and ﬁxing programming
errors.
    Be honest: Does debugging seem as important, difﬁcult, or worthy of study as
writing a program in the ﬁrst place? Or, is it just one of those things that you need
to do to ﬁnish a project? Software developers though spend huge amounts of time
debugging—estimates range up to half or more of their workdays. Finding and ﬁxing
bugs faster and more effectively directly increases productivity and can improve
program quality by eliminating more defects with available resources. Preventing
mistakes in the ﬁrst place would be even better, but no one has yet found the
technique to prevent errors, so effective debugging will remain essential.
    Improved programming languages and tools can supplant, but not eliminate,
debugging, by statically identifying errors and by dynamically detecting invariant
violations. For example, the type system in modern languages such as Java and
C# prevents many simple mistakes that slip by C programmers. Moreover, these
languages’ runtime bounds checks stop a program when it strays out of bounds,
which may be billions of instructions before the error manifests itself. Unfortunately,
there are countless ways in which a program can go wrong, almost all of which
languages and tools cannot detect or prevent. For example, in recent years there
has been considerable work in verifying sequences of operations in a program.Tools
can ensure that a ﬁle is opened before a program reads it, but they cannot check
that the correct ﬁle is accessed or that the program properly interprets its contents.
If either mistake occurs, someone still must debug the program to understand the
error and determine how to ﬁx it.
    In addition, debugging can be an enjoyable activity that shares the thrill of the
hunt and chase found in a good detective novel or video game. On the other hand,
a protracted, unsuccessful search for a bug in your code quickly loses its charm,
particularly when your boss is asking repeatedly about your (lack of ) progress.
Learning to debug well is essential to enjoying software development.
    This book can teach you how to debug more effectively. It is a complete and
pragmatic overview of debugging, written by a talented researcher who has devel-
oped many clever ways to isolate bugs. It explains best practices for ﬁnding and
ﬁxing errors in programs, ranging from systematically tracking error reports, repro-
ducing failures, observing symptoms, isolating the cause, and correcting defects.
Along with basic techniques and commonly used tools, the book also explores the
                                                                                          xv
xvi   Foreword



      author’s innovative techniques for isolating minimal input to reproduce an error
      and for tracking cause and effect through a program.
          Studying this book will make you a better programmer. You will be able to ﬁnd
      and ﬁx errors in your code (and your colleague’s code) faster and more effectively,
      a valuable skill that will enable you to ﬁnish projects earlier and produce programs
      with fewer defects. Also, if you read between the lines you will learn how to write
      code that is more easily tested and debugged, which further increases your ability
      to ﬁnd and correct defects. And thinking hard about what can go wrong with your
      program can help you avoid mistakes in the ﬁrst place, so you have less to debug.

                                                                            James Larus
                                                                     Microsoft Research
Preface

This is a book about bugs in computer programs—how to reproduce them, how
to ﬁnd them, and how to ﬁx them such that they do not occur. This book teaches
a number of techniques that allow you to debug any program in a systematic, and
sometimes even elegant, way. Moreover, the techniques can be widely automated,
which allows you to let your computer do most of the debugging. Questions this
book addresses include:
■ How can I reproduce failures faithfully?
■ How can I isolate what is relevant for the failure?
■ How does the failure come to be?

■ How can I ﬁx the program in the best possible way?
■ How can I learn from mistakes to prevent future ones?


    Once you understand how debugging works,you will not think about debugging
in the same way. Instead of seeing a wild mess of code, you will think about causes
and effects, and you will systematically set up and reﬁne hypotheses to track failure
causes. Your insights may even make you set up your own automated debugging
tool. All of this allows you to spend less time on debugging, which is why you are
interested in automated debugging in the ﬁrst place, right?

How This Book Came to Be Written
Although I work as a researcher, I have always considered myself a programmer,
because this is how I spend most of my time. During programming, I make mis-
takes, and I have to debug my code. I would like to say that I am some type of
überprogrammer—that I never make mistakes—but I am only human, just like
anyone else.
    During my studies,I have learned that an ounce of prevention is more than worth
a pound of cure. I have learned many ways of preventing mistakes. Today, I teach
them to my students. However, in striving for prevention we must not forget about
the cure. If we were doctors,we could not simply refuse treatment just because our
patient had not taken all possible preventive measures.
    So, rather than designing yet another ultimate prevention, I have sought good
cures. This same pragmatic attitude has been adopted by other researchers around
the globe. I am happy to report that we have succeeded. Today, a number of
advanced debugging techniques are available that widely automate the debugging
process.
    These techniques not only automate debugging, but also turn debugging from
a black art into a systematic and well-organized discipline that can be taught just
like any software engineering topic. Thus, I created a course on automated debug-
ging and reworked the lecture notes into a book. The result is what you see
before you.                                                                             xvii
xviii   Preface



        What Is New in this Second Edition
        In the past three years, the ﬁeld of automated debugging has made tremendous
        advances. This second edition treats some of the most exciting novelties.
        A new chapter on “Learning from Mistakes.” In Chapter 16, I describe recent
           work on leveraging change and bug databases, to detect automatically where
           previous defects were located, and how to predict where the next ones will be.
        New insights on how to report problems. Chapter 2 now includes insights
           from a ground-breaking study by Bettenburg et al., who have surveyed what
           developers need most in a problem report.
        Reproducing crashes. In Chapter 4, I present the Cdd and ReCrash tools, which
           allow for automatic reproduction of crashes while requiring little to no overhead.
          This addresses one of the most pressing problems in debugging.
        New material on tracking origins. Chapter 9 now discusses the WHYLINE tool
           for JAVA,allowing expert developers to ask questions on why speciﬁc things hap-
           pened during execution, or why they did not (e.g., “Why did this error message
           occur?”).
        Updated and extended discussions all over the book. Along with several
           updates on the state of the art, I have also ﬁxed all errors reported by readers,
           and revised and updated all the material.
        Despite the additions, the numbering of chapters, sections, and exercises is virtually
        unchanged. Thus, references to items in the ﬁrst edition should also apply to this
        second edition (which is helpful if you use this book in a course).

        Audience
        This book is intended for computer professionals, graduate students, and advanced
        undergraduates who want to learn how to debug programs systematically and with
        automated support. The reader is assumed to be familiar with programming and
        manual testing, either from introductory courses or work experience.

        What This Book Is and What It Is Not
        This book focuses on the cure of bugs—that is, the act of isolating and ﬁxing the
        defect in the program code once a failure has occurred. It only partially covers pre-
        venting defects. Many other books are available that provide an in-depth treatment
        of this topic. In fact,one might say that most of computer science is concerned with
        preventing bugs. However, when prevention fails, there is need for a cure, and that
        is what this book is about.

        Overview of Content
        This book is divided into 16 chapters and an Appendix. Chapters 1, 6, and 12 are
        prerequisites for later chapters.
                                                                              Preface    xix



    At the end of each chapter, you will ﬁnd a section called “Concepts,” which
summarizes the key concepts of the chapter. Some of these concepts are denoted
“How To.” These summarize recipes that can be easily followed (they are also listed
in the Contents). Furthermore, each chapter ends with practical exercises, for ver-
ifying your knowledge, and a “Further Reading” section. This book is organized as
follows.

Chapter 1: How Failures Come To Be
Your program fails. How can this be? The answer is that the programmer created
a defect in the code. When the code is executed, the defect causes an infection in
the program state, which later becomes visible as a failure. To ﬁnd the defect, one
must reason backward, starting with the failure. This chapter deﬁnes the essential
concepts when talking about debugging, and hints at the techniques discussed
subsequently—hopefully whetting your appetite for the remainder of this book.

Chapter 2: Tracking Problems
This chapter deals with the issue of how to manage problems as reported by users—
how to track and manage problem reports, how to organize the debugging process,
and how to keep track of multiple versions. This information constitutes the basic
framework in which debugging takes place.

Chapter 3: Making Programs Fail
Before a program can be debugged,we must set it up such that it can be tested—that
is, executed with the intent to make it fail. In this chapter, we review basic testing
techniques, with a special focus on automation and isolation.

Chapter 4: Reproducing Problems
The ﬁrst step in debugging is to reproduce the problem in question—that is,to create
a test case that causes the program to fail in the speciﬁed way. The ﬁrst reason is to
bring it under control, such that it can be observed. The second reason is to verify
the success of the ﬁx. This chapter discusses typical strategies for reproducing an
operating environment, including its history and problem symptoms.

Chapter 5: Simplifying Problems
Once we have reproduced a problem, we must simplify it—that is, we must ﬁnd
out which circumstances are not relevant to the problem and can thus be omitted.
This process results in a test case that contains only the relevant circumstances.
In the best case, a simpliﬁed test case report immediately pinpoints the defect. We
introduce delta debugging, an automated debugging method that simpliﬁes test
cases automatically.

Chapter 6: Scientiﬁc Debugging
Once we have reproduced and simpliﬁed a problem, we must understand how the
failure came to be. The process of arriving at a theory that explains some aspect of
xx   Preface



     the universe is known as scientiﬁc method. It is the appropriate process for obtain-
     ing problem diagnostics. We introduce basic techniques of creating and verifying
     hypotheses, creating experiments, conducting the process in a systematic fashion,
     and making the debugging process explicit.

     Chapter 7: Deducing Errors
     In this chapter, we begin exploring the techniques for creating hypotheses that
     were introduced in Chapter 6.We start with deduction techniques—reasoning from
     the abstract program code to the concrete program run. In particular, we present
     program slicing, an automated means of determining possible origins of a vari-
     able value. Using program slicing, one can effectively narrow down the number of
     possible infection sites.

     Chapter 8: Observing Facts
     Although deduction techniques do not take concrete runs into account,observation
     determines facts about what has happened in a concrete run. In this chapter, we
     look under the hood of the actual program execution and introduce widespread
     techniques for examining program executions and program states.These techniques
     include classical logging, interactive debuggers, and postmortem debugging—as
     well as eye-opening visualization and summarization techniques.

     Chapter 9: Tracking Origins
     Once we have observed an infection during debugging, we need to determine its
     origin. We discuss omniscient debugging, a technique that records an entire execu-
     tion history such that the user can explore arbitrary moments in time without ever
     restarting the program. Furthermore, we explore dynamic slicing, a technique that
     tracks the origins of speciﬁc values.

     Chapter 10: Asserting Expectations
     Observation alone is not enough for debugging. One must compare the observed
     facts with the expected program behavior. In this chapter, we discuss how to auto-
     mate such comparisons using well-known assertion techniques. We also show how
     to ensure the correct state of important system components such as memory.

     Chapter 11: Detecting Anomalies
     Although a single program run can tell you quite a bit, performing multiple runs for
     purpose of comparison offers several opportunities for locating commonalities and
     anomalies—anomalies that frequently help locate defects. In this chapter, we dis-
     cuss how to detect anomalies in code coverage and anomalies in data accesses. We
     also show how to infer invariants from multiple test runs automatically, in order
     to ﬂag later invariant violations. All of these anomalies are good candidates for
     identiﬁcation as infection sites.
                                                                             Preface    xxi



Chapter 12: Causes and Effects
Deduction, observation, and induction are all useful in ﬁnding potential defects.
However, none of these techniques alone is sufﬁcient in determining a failure
cause. How does one identify a cause? How does one isolate not just a cause but
the actual cause of a failure?This chapter lays the groundwork for techniques aimed
at locating failure causes systematically and automatically.

Chapter 13: Isolating Failure Causes
This chapter is central to automating most of debugging. We show how delta debug-
ging isolates failure causes automatically—in program input,in the program’s thread
schedule, and in program code. In the best case, the reported causes immediately
pinpoint the defect.

Chapter 14: Isolating Cause–Effect Chains
This chapter presents a method of narrowing down failure causes even further. By
extracting and comparing program states, delta debugging automatically isolates
the variables and values that cause the failure, resulting in a cause–effect chain of
the failure: For example,“variable x was 42; therefore p became null, and thus the
program failed.”

Chapter 15: Fixing the Defect
Once we have understood the failure’s cause–effect chain,we know how the failure
came to be. However, we must still locate the origin of the infection—that is, the
actual location of the defect. In this chapter, we discuss how to narrow down the
defect systematically—and, having found the defect, how to ﬁx it.

Chapter 16: Learning from Mistakes
At the end of each debugging session,one wonders how the defect could have come
to be in the ﬁrst place. We discuss techniques to collect,aggregate,and locate defect
information; techniques to predict where the next defects will be; and what to do
to prevent future errors.

Appendix: Formal Deﬁnitions
For the sake of readability, all formal deﬁnitions and proofs have been grouped in
the Appendix.

Glossary
The Glossary deﬁnes important terms used throughout the book.

Bibliography
The bibliography presents a wide range of sources of further reading in the topics
covered by the text.
xxii   Preface



       Supplements, Resources, and Web Extensions
       Much of the material covered in this book has never been discussed in a text-
       book before. The later chapters have not been widely tested in practice, and
       like any book on an evolving ﬁeld, this one will beneﬁt from more reﬁnement
       and from further work. In other words, this book is full of bugs, and I wel-
       come any comments on it. You can write to me care of Morgan Kaufmann, or
       email me at zeller@whyprogramsfail.com. There is also a Web page at http://www.
       whyprogramsfail.com for late-breaking information and updates (read: errata).


       Advice for Instructors
       I have used this book for ﬁve graduate courses on automated debugging. Each
       course consisted of approximately 16 lectures of 60 to 90 minutes each. Essen-
       tially, there was one lecture per chapter. The exercises stem from these courses
       (and their exams). I have also used parts of the book for a number of tutorials
       on debugging, as well as for inclusion in programming and software engineering
       courses. For your convenience, my presentation slides for these courses are avail-
       able in Keynote and Powerpoint format. Instructions on how to access them are
       available at http://www.whyprogramsfail.com.
            If you prefer to make your own slides,all of the original illustrations for this book
       are also available at this site.


       Advice for Readers
       Typographics
       To keep things simple, most examples in this book use simple input/output
       mechanisms—that is, the command line and the console. In all of these exam-
       ples, typewriter font stands for program output, and bold typewriter font
       for user input. The command-line prompt is denoted by a dollar sign ($), and the
       cursor by an underscore ( _ ). The following is a simple example. The user invokes
       the hello program, which prints the text Hello, world! on the console.
          $ ./hello
          Hello, world!
          $ _


       Programming Environment
       The concepts and techniques discussed in this book do not depend on a particular
       programming environment or operating system.To illustrate the techniques,though,
       I frequently use command-line tools, typically from the Linux/UNIX community. In
       addition to saving space,this is a matter of simplicity;these command-line tools pro-
       vide a functional core similar to that found in almost all sophisticated programming
       environments. Therefore, you should have no trouble transferring the examples to
       your personal programming workbench.
                                                                               Preface   xxiii




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many people have had a part in the development of this book. I would like to
thank everybody who reviewed drafts of the manuscript or parts of it: Philipp
Bouillon, Holger Cleve, David Cok, Michael Ernst, David Evans, Clint Jeffery, Dieter
Kranzlmüller, Jens Krinke, Raimondas Lencevicius, Bil Lewis, Ben Liblit, Christian
Lindig, Edu Metz, Robert Muth, Stephan Neuhaus, Jeff Offutt, Kerstin Reese, Zoltan
Somogyi, Peter Weißgerber, Thomas Zimmermann, and the students of the Auto-
mated Debugging courses at Saarland University, the University of Washington,
and ETH Zürich. Philipp Bouillon, Silvia Breu, Holger Cleve, Andreas Leitner, and
Martin Mehlmann also helped with the conception of the exercises. Thanks to all
readers who reported bugs in the ﬁrst edition, in particular Martin Burger, Roland
Illig, and Yong-Wu Wang. Christa Preisendanz of dpunkt Verlag and Tim Cox of
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers were most helpful. And ﬁnally, my family has
supported me enormously while writing this book—it’s great to have you with me.
     Have fun debugging!




 For the Snark’s a peculiar creature, that won’t
 Be caught in a commonplace way.
 Do all that you know, and try all that you don’t:
 Not a chance must be wasted to-day!
                                                                      – LEWIS CARROLL
                                                     The Hunting of the Snark (1876)
                                                                      CHAPTER


How Failures Come to Be
                                                                        1
Your program fails. How can this be? The answer is that the programmer creates
a defect in the code. When the code is executed, the defect causes an infec-
tion in the program state, which later becomes visible as a failure. To ﬁnd the
defect, one must reason backward, starting with the failure. This chapter deﬁnes
the essential concepts when talking about debugging, and hints at the techniques
discussed subsequently—hopefully whetting your appetite for the remainder of this
book.



1.1 MY PROGRAM DOES NOT WORK!
Oops!Your program fails. Now what? This is a common situation that interrupts our
routine and requires immediate attention. Because the program mostly worked until
now, we assume that something external has crept into our machine—something
that is natural and unavoidable;something we are not responsible for—namely,a bug.
   If you are a user, you have probably already learned to live with bugs. You may
even think that bugs are unavoidable when it comes to software. As a programmer,
though, you know that bugs do not creep out of mother nature into our programs.
(See Bug Story 1 for an exception.) Rather, bugs are inherent parts of the programs
we produce. At the beginning of any bug story stands a human who produces the
program in question.
   The following is a small program I once produced.The sample program is a very
simple sorting tool. Given a list of numbers as command-line arguments, sample
prints them as a sorted list on the standard output ($ is the command-line prompt).
   $ ./sample 9 7 8
   Output: 7 8 9
   $ _
Unfortunately, sample does not always work properly, as demonstrated by the
following failure:
   $ ./sample 11 14
   Output: 0 11
   $ _
                                                                                      1
2   CHAPTER 1 How Failures Come to Be




      BUG STORY 1
      The First Bug
      We do not know when the ﬁrst defect in a program was introduced. What we know,
      though,is when the ﬁrst actual bug was found. It may have been in search of plant food,
      or a warm place to lay its eggs,or both. Now it wandered around in this humming,warm
      machine that constantly clicked and rattled. But suddenly,it got stuck between the metal
      contacts of a relay—actually, one of 13,000 high-performance relays commissioned for
      this particular machine. The current killed it instantly—and its remains caused the
      machine to fail.
        This ﬁrst actual bug was a moth, retrieved by a technician from the Harvard Mark II
      machine on September 9,1947.The moth got taped into the logbook,with the comment
      “1545 Relay #70 Panel F (moth) in relay. First actual case of bug being found.”The moth
      thus became the living proof that computer problems could indeed be caused by actual
      bugs.


       Although the sample output is sorted and contains the right number of items,
    some original arguments are missing and replaced by bogus numbers. Here, 14 is
    missing and replaced by 0. (Actual bogus numbers and behavior on your system
    may vary.) From the sample failure, we can deduce that sample has a bug (or, more
    precisely, a defect). This brings us to the key question of this chapter:

      HOW DOES A DEFECT CAUSE A FAILURE, AND HOW CAN WE FIX IT?




    1.2 FROM DEFECTS TO FAILURES
    In general, a failure such as that in the sample program comes about in the four
    stages discussed in the following.
    1. The programmer creates a defect.A defect is a piece of the code that can cause an
       infection. Because the defect is part of the code,and because every code is initially
       written by a programmer, the defect is technically created by the programmer. If
       the programmer creates a defect, does that mean the programmer was at fault?
       Not necessarily. Consider the following:
       ■ The original requirements did not foresee future changes.Think about theY2K

         problem, for instance.
       ■ A program behavior may become classiﬁed as a “failure” only when the user

         sees it for the ﬁrst time.
       ■ In a modular program,a failure may happen because of incompatible interfaces

         of two modules.
       ■ In a distributed program, a failure may be the result of some unpredictable

         interaction of several components.
                                                           1.2 From Defects to Failures         3




  BUG STORY 2
  F-16 Problems
  A programmer who works for General Dynamics in Ft. Worth,TX, wrote some of the
  code for the F-16, and he has reported some neato-whiz-bang bug/feature they keep
  ﬁnding in the F-16.

  ■   Because the F-16 is a ﬂy-by-wire aircraft, the computer keeps the pilot from doing
      dumb things to himself. So if the pilot jerks hard over on the joystick, the computer
      will instruct the ﬂight surfaces to make a nice and easy 4- or 5-G ﬂip. But the plane
      can withstand a much higher ﬂip than that. So when they were “ﬂying” the F-16 in
      simulation over the equator, the computer got confused and instantly ﬂipped the
      plane over, killing the pilot [in simulation]. And since it can ﬂy forever upside down,
      it would do so until it ran out of fuel.

  The remaining bugs were actually found while ﬂying, rather than in simulation.
  ■   One of the ﬁrst things the Air Force test pilots tried on an early F-16 was to tell the
      computer to raise the landing gear while standing still on the runway. Guess what
      happened? Scratch one F-16. […]
  ■ The computer system onboard has a weapons management system that will attempt
      to keep the plane ﬂying level by dispersing weapons and empty fuel tanks in a
      balanced fashion. So,if you ask to drop a bomb the computer will ﬁgure out whether
      to drop a port or starboard bomb in order to keep the load even. One of the early
      problems with that was the fact that you could ﬂip the plane over and the computer
      would gladly let you drop a bomb or fuel tank. It would drop, dent the wing, and
      then roll off.


   In such settings, deciding on who is to blame is a political, not a technical, ques-
   tion. Nobody made a mistake, and yet a failure occurred. (See Bug Story 2 for
   more on such failures.)
2. The defect causes an infection. The program is executed, and with it the defect.
   The defect now creates an infection—that is, after execution of the defect, the
   program state differs from what the programmer intended.
      A defect in the code does not necessarily cause an infection. The defective
   code must be executed, and it must be executed under such conditions that the
   infection actually occurs.
3. The infection propagates. Most functions result in errors when fed with erro-
   neous input. As the remaining program execution accesses the state, it generates
   further infections that can spread into later program states.An infection need not,
   however, propagate continuously. It may be overwritten, masked, or corrected
   by some later program action.
4. The infection causes a failure. A failure is an externally observable error in
   the program behavior. It is caused by an infection in the program state.
4   CHAPTER 1 How Failures Come to Be



        The program execution process is sketched in Figure 1.1. Each program state
    consists of the values of the program variables, as well as the current execution
    position (formally, the program counter). Each state determines subsequent states,
    up to the ﬁnal state (at the bottom in the ﬁgure),in which we can observe the failure
    (indicated by the ).
        Not every defect results in an infection,and not every infection results in a failure.
    Thus,having no failures does not imply having no defects.This is the curse of testing,
    as pointed out by Dijkstra. Testing can only show the presence of defects, but never
    their absence.
        In the case of sample, though, we have actually experienced a failure. In hind-
    sight,every failure is thus caused by some infection,and every infection is caused by
    some earlier infection, originating at the defect. This cause–effect chain from defect
    to failure is called an infection chain.
        The issue of debugging is thus to identify the infection chain, to ﬁnd its root
    cause (the defect), and to remove the defect such that the failure no longer occurs.
    This is what we shall do with the sample program.


                                              Variable and input values


                                                                               Sane state


                                  Program                                      Erroneous code
                                     states

                                                                               Infected state




              Program execution




                                                                          Observer sees failure


    FIGURE 1.1
    A program execution as a succession of states. Each state determines the following states,
    and where from defect to failure errors propagate to form an infection chain.
                                                     1.3 Lost in Time and Space         5




1.3 LOST IN TIME AND SPACE
In general, debugging of a program such as sample can be decomposed into seven
steps (List 1.1), of which the initial letters form the word TRAFFIC.
   1. Track the problem in the database.
   2. Reproduce the failure.
   3. Automate and simplify the test case.
   4. Find possible infection origins.
   5. Focus on the most likely origins.
   6. Isolate the infection chain.
   7. Correct the defect.
    Of these steps,tracking the problem in a problem database is mere bookkeeping
(see also Chapter 2) and reproducing the problem is not that difﬁcult for determin-
istic programs such as sample. It can be difﬁcult for nondeterministic programs
and long-running programs, though, which is why Chapter 4 discusses the issues
involved in reproducing failures.
    Automating the test case is also rather straightforward, and results in auto-
matic simpliﬁcation (see also Chapter 5). The last step, correcting the defect, is
usually simple once you have understood how the defect causes the failure (see
Chapter 15).
    The ﬁnal three steps—from ﬁnding the infection origins to isolating the infection
chain—are the steps concerned with understanding how the failure came to be.

LIST 1.1: Seven Steps in Debugging (TRAFFIC)

T rack the problem in the database.

R  eproduce the failure.

A  utomate and simplify the test case.

F ind possible infection origins.

F ocus on the most likely origins:
    ■ Known infections
    ■ Causes in state, code, and input
    ■ Anomalies
    ■ Code smells


Isolate the infection chain.

C  orrect the defect.
6   CHAPTER 1 How Failures Come to Be



    This task requires by far the most time, as well as other resources. Understanding
    how the failure came to be is what the rest of this section, and the other chapters
    of this book, are about.
        Why is understanding the failure so difﬁcult? Considering Figure 1.1,all one need
    do to ﬁnd the defect is isolate the transition from a sane state (i.e., noninfected, as
    intended) to an infected state.This is a search in space (as we have to ﬁnd out which
    part of the state is infected) as well as in time (as we have to ﬁnd out when the
    infection takes place).
        However,examination of space and time are enormous tasks for even the simplest
    programs. Each state consists of dozens, thousands, or even millions of variables.
    For example, Figure 1.2 shows a visualization of the program state of the GNU
    compiler (GCC) while compiling a program. The program state consists of about
    44,000 individual variables, each with a distinct value, and about 42,000 references
    between variables. (Chapter 14 discusses how to obtain and use such program states
    in debugging.)
        Not only is a single state quite large, a program execution consists of thousands,
    millions, or even billions of such states. Space and time thus form a wide area in
    which only two points are well known ( Figure 1.3): initially, the entire state is sane
    (), and eventually some part of the state is infected (). Within the area spanned
    by space and time, the aim of debugging is to locate the defect—a single transition
    from sane () to infected () that eventually causes the failure (Figure 1.4).
        Thinking about the dimensions of space and time, this may seem like searching
    for a needle in an endless row of haystacks—and indeed, the fact is that debugging




                              /Hash
                              /hash table
                                            Extend tab




                                              /yyvsa



    FIGURE 1.2
    A program state of the GNU compiler. The state consists of 44,000 individual variables (shown
    as vertices) and about 42,000 references between variables (shown as edges).
                                                             1.3 Lost in Time and Space         7



                                               Variables




                             Time                  ?


FIGURE 1.3
Debugging as search in space and time. Initially, the program state is sane (), eventually,
it is infected (). The aim of debugging is to ﬁnd out where this infection originated.

                                               Variables




                             Time




FIGURE 1.4
The defect that is searched. A defect manifests itself as a transition from sane state () to
infected state (), where an erroneous statement causes the initial infection.


is largely a search problem. This search is driven by the following two major
principles:
   1. Separate sane from infected. If a state is infected, it may be part of the infec-
      tion propagating from defect to failure. If a state is sane, there is no infection
      to propagate.
   2. Separate relevant from irrelevant. A variable value is the result of a limited
      number of earlier variable values.Thus,only some part of the earlier state may
      be relevant to the failure.
8   CHAPTER 1 How Failures Come to Be



                                                   Variables




                               Time




    FIGURE 1.5
    Deducing value origins. By analyzing the program code, we can ﬁnd out that an infected
    variable value () can have originated only from a small number of earlier variables ().

       Figure 1.5 illustrates this latter technique. The failure, to reiterate, can only have
    been caused by a small number of other variables in earlier states (denoted using
    the exclamation point, ), the values of which in turn can only have come from
    other earlier variables. One says that subsequent, variable values depend on earlier
    values.This results in a series of dependences from the failure back to earlier variable
    values.To locate the defect,it sufﬁces to examine these values only—as other values
    could not have possibly caused the failure—and separate these values into sane and
    infected. If we ﬁnd an infected value, we must ﬁnd and ﬁx the defect that causes it.
    Typically, this is the same defect that causes the original failure.
       Why is it that a variable value can be caused only by a small number of earlier
    variables? Good programming style dictates division of the state into units such that
    the information ﬂow between these units is minimized.Typically,your programming
    language provides a means of structuring the state, just as it helps you to structure
    the program code. However, whether you divide the state into functions, modules,
    objects, packages, or components, the principle is the same: a divided state is much
    easier to conquer.



    1.4 FROM FAILURES TO FIXES
    Let’s put our knowledge about states and dependences into practice, following the
    TRAFFIC steps (List 1.1).

    1.4.1 Track the Problem
    The ﬁrst step in debugging is to track the problem—that is, to ﬁle a problem report
    such that the defect will not go by unnoticed. In our case,we have already observed
                                                      1.4 From Failures to Fixes       9



the failure symptom: the output of sample, when invoked with arguments 11 and
14, contains a zero.
   $ ./sample 11 14
   Output: 0 11
   $ _
An actual problem report would include this invocation as an instruction on how
to reproduce the problem (see Chapter 2).


1.4.2 Reproduce the Failure
In case of the sample program, reproducing the failure is easy. All you need
do is reinvoke sample, as shown previously. In other cases, though, reproducing
may require control over all possible input sources (techniques are described in
Chapter 4).


1.4.3 Automate and Simplify the Test Case
If sample were a more complex program, we would have to think about how to
automate the failure (in that we want to reproduce the failure automatically) and
how to simplify its input such that we obtain a minimal test case. In the case of
sample,though,this is not necessary (for more complex programs,Chapter 5 covers
the details).


1.4.4 Find Possible Infection Origins
Where does the zero in the output come from?This is the fourth step in theTRAFFIC
steps:We must ﬁnd possible infection origins.To ﬁnd possible origins, we need the
actual C source code of sample, shown in Example 1.1. We quickly see that the
program consists of two functions: shell_sort() (which implements the shell sort
algorithm) and main,which realizes a simple test driver around shell_sort().The
main function:

   ■ Allocates an array a[] (line 32).
   ■ Copies the command-line arguments into a[] (lines 33–34).
   ■ Sorts a[] by invoking shell_sort() (line 36).
   ■ Prints the content of a[] (lines 38–41).


    By matching the output to the appropriate code, we ﬁnd that the 0 printed
by sample is the value of the variable a[0], the ﬁrst element of the array a[].
This is the infection we observe: at line 39 in sample.c, variable a[0] is obviously
zero.
   Where does the zero in a[0] come from?Working our way backward from line 40,
we ﬁnd in line 36 the call shell_sort(a, argc), where the array a[] is passed
by reference. This function might well be the point at which a[0] was assigned the
infected value.
10   CHAPTER 1 How Failures Come to Be



     EXAMPLE 1.1: The sample program sorts given numbers—that is, mostly
      1   /* sample.c -- Sample C program to be debugged */
      2
      3   #include <stdio.h>
      4   #include <stdlib.h>
      5
      6   static void shell_sort(int a[], int size)
      7   {
      8       int i, j;
      9       int h = 1;
     10
     11       do {
     12            h = h * 3 + 1;
     13       } while (h <= size);
     14       do {
     15            h /= 3;
     16            for (i = h; i < size; i++)
     17            {
     18                int v = a[i];
     19                for (j = i; j >= h && a[j --- h] > v; j ---= h)
     20                    a[j] = a[j --- h];
     21                if (i != j)
     22                    a[j] = v;
     23            }
     24       } while (h != 1);
     25   }
     26
     27   int main(int argc, char *argv[])
     28   {
     29       int *a;
     30       int i;
     31
     32       a = (int *)malloc((argc --- 1) * sizeof(int));
     33       for (i = 0; i < argc --- 1; i++)
     34           a[i] = atoi(argv[i + 1]);
     35
     36       shell_sort(a, argc);
     37
     38       printf("Output: ");
     39       for (i = 0; i < argc --- 1; i++)
     40           printf("%d ", a[i]);
     41       printf("N");
     42
     43       free(a);
     44
     45       return 0;
     46   }


        Unfortunately, shell_sort() in lines 6–25 is quite obscure. We cannot trace
     back the value of a[0] to a speciﬁc origin simply by deduction from the program
     code. Instead, we have to observe what actually happens in the failing run.
                                                                1.4 From Failures to Fixes     11



                                 Variables

                argv argv a         a        a
            argc [1] [2] [0]       [1]   [2]     i   size   h
                                                                   a = malloc(...)
             3   “11” “14”   ?      ?        ?   ?
                                                                   i=0
                                                 0
                                                                   a[i] = atoi(argv[i + 1])
                             11
                                                                   i++
                                                 1
                                                                   a[i] = atoi(argv [i + 1])
     Time                           14
                                                                   i++
                                                 2
                                                                   shell_sort(a,argc)
                                                      3     ?



                                                                   return 0
             3   “11” “14”   0      11       ?   2



FIGURE 1.6
Observing the sample run. Using observation tools, we can observe the program state as it
progresses through time.


    In principle, we can observe anything about the sample run, as sketched in
Figure 1.6. We can even “execute” it on paper. However, this approach does not
scale. We must focus on speciﬁc parts of the state or on speciﬁc moments in time.
Relying on our earlier deduction on the origins of a[0], we focus on the execution
of shell_sort().
■   We can easily ﬁnd out that shell_sort() does not access any nonlocal variables.
    Whatever comes out of shell_sort() is determined by its input. If we observe
    the arguments at the invocation of shell_sort(), two things can happen:
    1. The arguments at the invocation of shell_sort() are sane (i.e., are just as
       intended). In this case, the infection must take place during the execution
       of shell_sort(), as sketched in Figure 1.7.
    2. The arguments are already infected. In this case,the infection must have taken
       place before the execution of shell_sort().
    To ﬁnd out how shell_sort() was actually invoked,we need a means of observ-
ing the state during execution. In this introductory chapter, we use the simplest of
all observation techniques: We insert output statements in the code that log spe-
ciﬁc variables and their values when executed. For instance, we could insert the
following code in line 10 to have the values of the parameters a[] and size logged
on the standard error channel whenever shell_sort() is invoked.
12   CHAPTER 1 How Failures Come to Be



                                                    Variables




                                Time




     FIGURE 1.7
     Observing a transition from sane to infected. If we know that an earlier state is sane () and a
     later state is infected (), we can narrow down our search to isolate the transition between
     these two states.


         fprintf(stderr, "At shell_sort");
         for (i = 0; i < size; i++)
             fprintf(stderr, "a[%d] = %d\n", i, a[i]);
         fprintf(stderr, "size = %d\n", size);


     1.4.5 Focus on the Most Likely Origins
     After inserting the code and restarting sample with the arguments 11 and 14, you
     will ﬁnd that at shell_sort() the values of the parameters are as follows.
         a[0] = 11
         a[1] = 14
         a[2] = 0
         size = 3
     We see that shell_sort() is invoked with three elements—that is, the array a[]
     to be sorted is [11, 14, 0].This state is infected—that is, a[] should contain only
     two elements. As discussed previously, an infected state is likely to cause failures,
     and this particular state may well be the cause of our failure. Our hypothesis is that
     shell_sort() properly sorts the three elements of a[] in place to [0, 11, 14].
     Later on, though, only the ﬁrst two elements of a[] will be printed, resulting in the
     failure output.

     1.4.6 Isolate the Origin of the Infection
     According to our earlier reasoning, the infection must have occurred before the
     invocation of shell_sort(). Obviously,the parameter size is wrong. We can trace
                                                        1.5 From Failures to Fixes        13



back its origin to the point at which shell_sort() is invoked: In line 36, we ﬁnd
the invocation
   shell_sort(a, argc);

and ﬁnd that the size parameter gets its value from the argc variable. However,
argc is not the number of elements in a[]. It is the number of arguments to the
sample program, including the name sample itself (argc is always one more than
the number of elements in a). Thus, the following is our speculation about what is
happening in our program:
   1. The array a[] is allocated and initialized with the correct number of
      elements (2).
   2. shell_sort() is invoked such that the size parameter is 3 instead of 2 (the
      state is infected).
   3. size being 3 causes shell_sort() to access a[] beyond the allocated space
      (namely, at a[2]).
   4. The uninitialized memory at a[2] happens to be 0.
   5. During the sort, a[2] is eventually swapped with a[0], thus setting a[0] to
      zero (the infection has spread to a[0]).
   6. Thus, the zero value of a[0] is printed, causing the failure.
   You may wonder why sample actually worked when being invoked with the
arguments 9 7 8. The defect was the same, and it caused the same infection. How-
ever, as a[3] in this case turned out to be larger than 9 it did not get swapped with
another array element. At the return of shell_sort() the infection was gone, and
thus the defect never showed up as a failure.


1.4.7 Correct the Defect
So far, we are still speculating about the failure cause. To deliver the ﬁnal proof, we
have to correct the defect. If the failure no longer occurs, we know that the defect
caused the failure.
    In addition to prohibiting the failure in question we want to prohibit as many
failures as possible. In our case, we achieve this by replacing line 36,
   shell_sort(a, argc);

   with the correct invocation
   shell_sort(a, argc - 1);
Repeating the test with the ﬁxed program, as follows, shows that the original failure
no longer occurs.
   $ ./sample 11 14
   Output: 11 14
   $ _
This resolves the sample problem.
14   CHAPTER 1 How Failures Come to Be




     1.5 AUTOMATED DEBUGGING TECHNIQUES
     Essentially, we have solved the sample problem manually—that is, without using
     any speciﬁc tools. In principle, all debugging problems can be solved manually—by
     deduction from the source code and observation of what is going on in a program.
     (Purists might even argue that deduction alone sufﬁces to prove a program correct,
     removing the need to ﬁx defects.)
        In practice, though, it is unwise to rely on manual debugging alone, as the com-
     puter can relieve you of most boring and tedious tasks. In particular, the sample
     program discussed earlier can be debugged almost automatically. Figure 1.8 depicts
     the automated debugging techniques discussed in the following.

     Simpliﬁed input. Chapter 5 introduces delta debugging—a technique that auto-
        matically narrows down the difference between a passing and a failing run.
        Applied to program input, delta debugging returns a simpliﬁed input wherein
        each part contributes to the failure.



                  Variables                      Variables                       Variables




                                                     ?

     Time                           Time                            Time
                                                                                     ?




                    (a)                            (b)                              (c)

                  Variables                      Variables                       Variables



                      ?


     Time                           Time                            Time




                     (d)                            (e)                            (f )

     FIGURE 1.8
     Some automated debugging techniques: (a) program slice, (b) observing state, (c) watching
     state, (d) asserting an invariant, (e) anomalies, and (f) cause–effect chain.
                                         1.5 Automated Debugging Techniques               15



       Applied to the failing sample run, delta debugging determines that each of
   the arguments 11 and 14 is relevant. The failure no longer occurs if sample is
   being called with one argument only.
Program slices. Chapter 7 explores basic deduction methods—that is, deducing
   from the (abstract) program code what can and cannot happen in the (concrete)
   program run. The most important technique is slicing—separating the part of
   a program or program run relevant to the failure. In Figure 1.8(a), we can see
   that only a fraction of the state actually could have caused the failure. Applied to
   sample, a program slice could determine that a[0] got the zero value because
   of the values of a[2] and size, which is already a good hint.
Observing state. Chapter 8 discusses observation techniques, especially using
   debuggers. A debugger is a tool that can make a program stop under speciﬁc con-
   ditions,which allows a programmer to observe the entire state (see Figure 1.8b).
   This allows us to tell the sane program state from the infected state. Using a
   debugger on sample, we would be able to observe the values of a[] and size
   at any moment in time without changing or recompiling the program.
Watching state. Another important feature of debuggers, also discussed in Chap-
   ter 8, is that they allow us to watch small parts of the state to determine if they
   change during execution. As sketched in Figure 1.8(c), this allows us to identify
   the precise moment at which a variable becomes infected. Using a debugger
   on sample, we would be able to watch the value of a[0] to catch the precise
   statement that assigns the zero from a[2].
Assertions. When observing a program state, the programmer must still compare
   the observed values with the intended values—a process that takes time and is
   error prone. Chapter 10 introduces assertions, which are used to delegate this
   comparison process to the computer. The programmer speciﬁes the expected
   values and has the computer check them at runtime—especially at the beginning
   and ending of functions (i.e., pre- and postconditions). Such assertions typically
   include invariants over data structures that hold during the entire run.
       If all assertions pass, this means that the state is just as expected. When used
   to check invariants, as sketched in Figure 1.8(d), assertions can mark large parts
   of the state as “sane,” allowing the programmer to focus on the other parts.
       One speciﬁc instance of assertions is memory assertion, checking whether
   memory is accessed in a legal way. Applied to sample, tools exist that can easily
   identify that a[2] is accessed without being allocated or initialized. These tools
   are also discussed in Chapter 10.
Anomalies. In general, we can assume that a program works well most of the time.
  If a program fails nonetheless, we can use our knowledge about the passing runs
  and focus on the differences between the passing runs and the failing run. Such
  differences point out anomalies, as sketched in Figure 1.8(e). Detecting anoma-
  lies requires techniques designed to compare program runs. It also requires
  techniques for creating abstractions over multiple runs. Chapter 11 discusses
  these techniques.
16   CHAPTER 1 How Failures Come to Be



           Applied to sample, we can, for instance, compare the coverage of the two
       runs sample 11 (passing) and sample 11 14 (failing). It turns out that the
       statements where a[j] is assigned a value are executed only in the failing run,
       but not in the passing run. Thus, if we are looking for a zero value in a[0] these
       two lines might be a good starting point.
     Cause–effect chains. Chapter 14 applies delta debugging to program states, thus
       identifying in each state which particular variable(s) caused the failure. This
       results in a cause–effect chain, as sketched in Figure 1.8(f). Although causes are
       not necessarily errors, they help to narrow down the relevant elements of a
       failure.
           Delta debugging on states is also the basis of the ASKIGOR automated debug-
       ging server. Its diagnosis, shown in Figure 1.9, summarizes how the failure came
       to be: variable argc was 3; hence, a[2] was zero; thus, sample failed.




     FIGURE 1.9
     The ASKIGOR debugging server with a diagnosis for sample. Given an executable, a failing
     invocation, and a passing invocation, ASKIGOR automatically produces a diagnosis consisting
     of a cause–effect chain from invocation to failure.
                                             1.5 Automated Debugging Techniques           17




FIGURE 1.10
Defect distribution in ECLIPSE . Each rectangle stands for a package; the brighter the
rectangle, the more defects were discovered (and ﬁxed) in the package after release.


Learning from mistakes. After discussing how to ﬁx the defect in Chapter 15,
   Chapter 16 shows how to aggregate earlier problem reports and ﬁxes to ﬁnd out
   where the most defects occur in the program. Figure 1.10, for instance, shows
   the distribution of defects across the ECLIPSE project: Each package is depicted
   by a rectangle; the larger the rectangle, the larger the class, and the brighter the
   rectangle,the higher the defect density—that is,the higher the number of defects
   that were ﬁxed per 1,000 lines of code in the package.
       Defect distributions as in ECLIPSE can guide the debugging process toward
   likely defect sources. They can also help in predicting where the next defects
   will be,such that quality assurance efforts are directed toward those components
   that deserve most of the attention.

   All of these techniques can be combined to locate the defect systematically—and
with a substantial degree of automation. In addition to these chapters focusing on
concrete techniques, the following chapters focus on prerequisites:
   ■ Tracking failures (Chapter 2)
   ■ Running tests automatically (Chapter 3)
   ■ Reproducing failures (Chapter 4)
18   CHAPTER 1 How Failures Come to Be



        ■   Combining various reasoning techniques (Chapter 6)
        ■   Finding failure causes systematically (Chapter 12 )
     The ﬁrst of these prerequisites is that a problem exists. Consequently, the next
     chapter starts with tracking and reproducing failures.



     1.6 BUGS, FAULTS, OR DEFECTS?
     Before we conclude this chapter, let’s examine our vocabulary. As illustrated at the
     beginning of this chapter, the word bug suggests something humans can touch and
     remove—and are probably not responsible for. This is already one reason to avoid
     the word bug. Another reason is its lack of precision. Applied to programs, a bug
     can mean:
        ■ An incorrect program code (“This line is buggy”).
        ■ An incorrect program state (“This pointer, being null, is a bug”).
        ■ An incorrect program execution (“The program crashes; this is a bug”).


        This ambiguity of the term bug is unfortunate, as it confuses causes with symp-
     toms: The bug in the code caused a bug in the state, which caused a bug in the
     execution—and when we saw the bug we tracked the bug, and ﬁnally found and
     ﬁxed the bug.The remainder of this book uses the following, more precise, terms:
        ■ Defect:An incorrect program code (a bug in the code).
        ■ Infection:An incorrect program state (a bug in the state).
        ■ Failure:An observable incorrect program behavior (a bug in the behavior).


         The wording of the previous example thus becomes clearer: The defect caused
     an infection, which caused a failure—and when we saw the failure we tracked
     the infection, and ﬁnally found and ﬁxed the defect.
         The industry uses several synonyms of these terms.The IEEE standards deﬁne the
     term fault as defect is deﬁned here. They also deﬁne bug as a fault, thus making it a
     synonym of defect—and debugging thus becomes the activity of removing defects
     in the software.
         The terms error and fault are frequently used as a synonym of infection,but also
     for mistakes made by the programmer. Failures are also called issues or problems.
     In this book, we use problem as a general term for a questionable property of the
     program run. A problem becomes a failure as soon as it is considered incorrect.
         Some defects cannot be attributed to a speciﬁc location in the software, but
     rather to its overall design or architecture. I call such defects ﬂaws. In general,
     ﬂaws are bad news, because they suggest major changes involved in ﬁxing the
     problem.
         So much for our family of bugs and related terms. Actually, your choice of one
     term over another shows two things. First, your wording shows how seriously you
     take the quality of your work. As Humphrey (1999) points out, the term bug “has
                                                                            1.7 Concepts         19



an unfortunate connotation of merely being an annoyance; something you could
swat away or ignore with minor discomfort.” He suggests defect instead, and this
book follows his advice. Likewise, the word failure is to be taken more seriously
than issue. (If you ﬁnd a ﬂaw, you should be truly alarmed.)
    Second,your choice shows whether you want to attribute failures to individuals.
Whereas bugs seem to creep into the software as if they had a life of their own,errors
and faults are clearly results of human action. These terms were coined by Edsger
W. Dijkstra as pejorative alternatives to bug in order to increase the programmers’
sense of responsibility. After all, who wants to create a fault? However, if a program
does not behave as intended this may not be the effect of a human mistake (as
discussed in Section 1.2). In fact, even a program that is correct with respect to
its speciﬁcation can still produce surprises.This is why I use the terms defect and
infection instead of the guilt-ridden faults and errors.All of these deﬁnitions (and
more) can be found in the Glossary.




1.7 CONCEPTS
In general, a failure comes about in the following three stages (see also List 1.2):
     ■ The programmer creates a defect in the program code (also known as bug or
       fault).
     ■ The defect causes an infection in the program state.
     ■ The infection causes a failure—an externally observable error.




LIST 1.2: Facts on Debugging
■   Barron (2002) states that roughly 22% of PCs and 25% of notebooks break down every
    year, compared to 9% of VCRs, 7% of big-screen TVs, 7% of clothes dryers, and 8% of
    refrigerators.
■   According to a U.S. federal study conducted by RTI (2002), software bugs are costing the
    U.S. economy an estimated $59.5 billion each year.
■   Beizer (1990) reports that of the labor expended to develop a working program, 50% is
    typically spent on testing and debugging activities.
■   According to Hailpern and Santhanam (2002), validation activities (debugging, testing, and
    veriﬁcation) can easily range from 50% to 75% of the total development cost.
■   Gould (1975) reports that out of a group of experienced programmers the three program-
    mers best at debugging were able to ﬁnd defects in about 30% the time and made only
    40% as many errors as the three worst.
■   In RTI (2002), developers estimate that improvements in testing and debugging could
    reduce the cost of software bugs by a third, or $22.5 billion.
  20     CHAPTER 1 How Failures Come to Be



How To To debug a program, proceed in seven steps (TRAFFIC):
          1. Track: Create an entry in the problem database (see Chapter 2).
          2. Reproduce: Reproduce the failure (see Chapter 4).
             3. Automate:Automate and simplify the test case (see Chapters 3 and 5).
             4. Find origins: Follow back the dependences from the failure to possible
                infection origins (see Chapters 7 and 9).
             5. Focus: If there are multiple possible origins, ﬁrst examine the following:
                ■ Known infections, as determined by assertions (see Chapter 10) and

                  observation (see Chapter 8)
                ■ Causes in state, code, and input (see Chapters 13 and 14)
                ■ Anomalies (see Chapter 11)
                ■ Code smells (see Chapter 7)
                ■ Earlier defect sources (see Chapter 16)

                Prefer automated techniques where possible.
             6. Isolate: Use scientiﬁc method (see Chapter 6) to isolate the origin of the
                infection. Continue isolating origins transitively until you have an infection
                chain from defect to failure.
             7. Correct: Remove the defect, breaking the infection chain (see Chapter 15).
                Verify the success of your ﬁx.
          Of all debugging activities, locating the defect (the ﬁnd–focus–isolate loop in
            TRAFFIC) is by far the most time consuming.
          Correcting a defect is usually simple, unless it involves a major redesign (in which
             case we call the defect a ﬂaw).
             Not every defect results in an infection,and not every infection results in a failure.
         Yet, every failure can be traced back to some infection, which again can be traced
         back to a defect.



          1.8 TOOLS
         Toward your own experimentation with techniques,the“Tools”section within chap-
         ters provides references where tools mentioned in the text are publicly available.
         Typically, the text provides a URL where the tool is available—often as an open-
         source download. If the tool is not publicly available, the reference describing it
         will be listed in the “Further Reading” section. You may want to ask the authors
         whether they will make their tool available to you.
            As this chapter is an introduction, references to tools will come in the later
         chapters. However, note that Clint Jeffery’s Algorithmic and Automatic Debug-
         ging Home Page—a Web page that collects links to debugging techniques and
         tools, and which will give you the latest and greatest in debugging, is available at
         http://www2.cs.uidaho.edu/∼jeffery/aadebug.html.
                                                              1.9 Further Reading        21




1.9 FURTHER READING
To avoid breaking up the ﬂow of the main text, references to related work are
collected in a section at the end of each chapter. This ﬁrst “Further Reading”section
describes papers,books,and other resources relevant to the material covered in this
chapter.
   The story about the “ﬁrst bug”was reported by Hopper (1981). Apparently, Hop-
per believed that this“ﬁrst bug”coined the term bug for computer programs (“From
then on, when anything went wrong with a computer, we said it had bugs in it”).
However, as Shapiro (1994) points out, bug was already a common “shop” term in
Edison’s time (1878) for unexpected systems faults. The carryover to computers
(certainly complex systems) is almost unavoidable.
    Dijkstra’s quote that testing can only show the presence of bugs stems from 1972.
In 1982,Dijkstra was also among the ﬁrst to criticize the word bug and suggest error
instead. In 1989, he made clear that this wording would put “the blame where it
belongs, viz., with the programmer who made the error.”
   The origin of the word bug is clariﬁed by Beizer (1999). In 2000, he sug-
gested dropping fault and error due to their pejorative aspect. The terms bug
and defect are compared by Humphrey (1999). The term infection, as well as
the idea of an infection propagating from defect to failure, were proposed by
Voas (1992).
    Finally, in that this chapter serves as introduction to the book, we will now look
into other material that serves as an introduction to debugging.

The Soul of a New Machine, by Kidder (1981), tracks a team of engineers at
  Data General working on an innovative new computer. This is not a techni-
  cal book but a well-orchestrated hymn to the man behind the machine. It
  describes the challenges and strains of debugging. It the Pulitzer prize winner for
  nonﬁction.
Showstopper!, by Zachary (1994), describes how Microsoft created Windows NT.
  Not too technical, it focuses on the people and their processes. Not too surpris-
  ing, eventually ﬁnishing the product becomes a struggle with always resurfacing
 “showstopper” bugs.
Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, by Pirsig (1974), despite its title,
  neither contains many facts on Zen nor many facts on motorcycle maintenance.
  It is an inquiry on what is good and what is not, in a clear engineer’s language,
  digging into the depths of philosophy—still a cult book today.The section on how
  a mechanic ﬁxes a motorcycle is a must-read.
Code Complete, by McConnell (1993), is a practical handbook on how to construct
  software. “Practical” means “pragmatic” and “easily understandable.” McConnell
  goes straight at the topic and tells you how to code and how not to code—and
  how to debug, of course.
22   CHAPTER 1 How Failures Come to Be



     The Practice of Programming, by Kernighan and Pike (1999), describes best prac-
       tices that help make individual programmers more effective and productive.
       Although just 250 pages long,barrels of wisdom and experience have been distilled
       in this book.
     Figure 1.10, visualizing the distribution of defect density in ECLIPSE was created
       by Michael Ogawa (2007), inspired by Martin Wattenberg’s “Map of the Market”
       (1998). The actual data was mined by ? (?) from the ECLIPSE version and bug
       databases.
     Bug Story 2, about the F-16 problems, was posted in Risks digest (vol. 3, issue 44),
       August 1986.



     EXERCISES
      1.1 Relate the following statements to the terms defect, infection, propagation,
          and failure. Discuss how they (possibly) came to be, and how they (possibly)
          relate to the output.
          ■ A program throws a null pointer exception.
          ■ A print statement printf("Helo World") has a typo.

          ■ A constant ␲ ⫽ 31.4 is declared, but all but one test case pass.
          ■ Variable z has the value 15.
          ■ A bug is removed by ﬁxing three ﬁles.
          ■ A clock shows Greenwich mean time rather than the local time zone.


      1.2 Compile sample on your system. (You can download the source from
          http://www.whyprogramsfail.com/.) When compiling, enable all possible
          warning options you can ﬁnd.
      1.3 Test sample on your system. Do the failures occur as described here? If not,
          can you ﬁnd a test case that triggers a failure?
      1.4   Each of the following actions effectively ﬁxes the sample program. Which
            are the advantages and disadvantages of these actions?
            (a) Insert a statement argc = argc — 1 at the top of main, and replace all
                 later occurrences of argc — 1 by argc.
            (b) Change the loop in shell_sort() such that it ends at size — 1 instead
                 of size.
            (c) Introduce a variable size = argc — 1 at the top of main, and replace
                 all later occurrences of argc — 1 by size. Change the shell_sort()
                 invocation to shell_sort(a, size).
            (d) Insert a statement size = size — 1 at the top of shell_sort().
      1.5 “If we can prove a program is correct, we have no need for testing or debug-
          ging.” Argue for and against this assertion. Use at least three arguments in
          either case.
                                                                1.9 Further Reading   23



1.6   Perform a Web search for as many occurrences of bug, defect, and fault you
      can ﬁnd via the following:
      (a) On the entire Internet.
      (b) On the Web pages of your preferred software vendor.
      (c) In computer-related newsgroups.




You are in a little maze of twisty passages, all different.
                                                                    – WILL CROWTHER
                                                              Adventure game (1972)
                                                                          CHAPTER


Tracking Problems
                                                                             2
This chapter deals with the issue of how to manage problems as reported by users:
how to track and manage problem reports, how to organize the debugging pro-
cess, and how to keep track of multiple versions. All of this constitutes the basic
framework within which debugging takes place.



2.1 OH! ALL THESE PROBLEMS
Technically, a defect is created at the moment the programmer writes the appropri-
ate code. However, its actual life cycle begins when some human spots the defect
itself or one of its effects. Frequently,the human is a user,and the effect is a problem
that needs to be solved.
    Solving a user’s problem is more than just debugging. At the start, we need to
ﬁnd out whether we can actually do something. Maybe the problem is a simple
misunderstanding, or is caused by external components we cannot control. At the
end, it does not sufﬁce to ﬁx the defect in our production code. To solve the user’s
problem, we also need to deploy the ﬁx. All these steps involved in solving the
problem need to be organized and managed. The life cycle of a software problem—
from the ﬁrst occurrence of a problem to its ﬁx—can be summarized in the following
ﬁve steps:
   1. The user informs the vendor about the problem.
   2. The vendor reproduces the problem.
   3. The vendor isolates the problem circumstances.
   4. The vendor locates and ﬁxes the defect locally.
   5. The vendor delivers the ﬁx to the user.
   As a programmer,you can be involved in each of these steps. First,you may always
take the role of a user (for instance, when testing software or when working with
third-party components). Later, you may be involved with reproducing, isolating,
locating, and ﬁxing the problem—the core of debugging. Finally, you may even be
involved with delivering the ﬁx.

                                                                                           25
26   CHAPTER 2 Tracking Problems



        Unless you are a one-person company with an elephant memory, this life
     cycle must be organized in some way. As a manager, you must be able to answer
     questions, such as:
        ■ Which problems are currently open? An open problem indicates that there
          is probably some defect in the software that must be ﬁxed.
        ■ Which are the most severe problems? Typically, the most severe problems

          are the ﬁrst to get ﬁxed.
        ■ Did similar problems occur in the past? If there were similar problems,

          there may be a solution at hand that need only to be delivered.
     Furthermore, the user may want to know the state of his or her problem, and be
     quickly informed about any progress made. Our challenge is thus:

       HOW CAN WE ORGANIZE THE LARGE-SCALE DEBUGGING PROCESS?




     2.2 REPORTING PROBLEMS
     To ﬁx a problem, the developer must ﬁrst be able to reproduce it. Otherwise, there
     would be no way of ascertaining further details about the problem. Worse, there
     would be no way of determining if the problem were ﬁxed.The information required
     for this task is called a problem report (PR),also known as a change request (CR) or
     simply bug report. What goes into a problem report?The basic principle of problem
     reports is:
                                     State all relevant facts.
        Here, relevant means “relevant for reproducing the problem”—that is, state the
     problem from the developer’s perspective. However, determining the relevant facts
     can impose problems. How can the user know what is relevant or not?
        Real-life problem reports frequently include too much, such as gigantic core
     dumps, entire hard disk content, and even entire drives. However, they may not
     include enough: “Your program crashed. Just wanted to let you know” (A problem
     report about the GNU DDD debugger I received in 1999). Let us therefore explore
     which speciﬁc facts typically should be included in every problem report.

     2.2.1 Problem Facts
     In 2008,students of Saarland University conducted a survey across 156 experienced
     APACHE, ECLIPSE, and MOZILLA developers, trying to ﬁnd out on what makes a
     good bug report.Their study found a frequent“mismatch between what developers
     consider most helpful and what users provide,” and also found that for developers,
     facts about the problem are by far the most important.
                                                           2.2 Reporting Problems          27



The problem history
This is a description of what has to be done to reproduce the problem, as a minimal
set of steps necessary. Typically, this also includes any accessed resources, such as
input or conﬁguration ﬁles:
    1. Start the Preview application.
    2. Using “Open File”, open the attached document “Book.pdf”.
    In the study by Bettenburg et al., the problem history was considered the most
important fact: If the problem cannot be reproduced, it is unlikely to be ﬁxed. If
you can, have another user or tester repeat and review the steps described here.
    If you can, simplify the problem as much as possible. If your database fails (say,
on a 1,000-line SQL statement), the chances of getting the problem ﬁxed are low—
simply because such SQL statements do not occur this frequently in practice. But
if you can simplify the SQL statement to three lines, such that the problem still
persists, you’re likely to get heard. Likewise, if certain circumstances are crucial for
the problem to occur, be sure to include them. This gives developers a head start in
debugging. (See Chapters 5 and 13 for more on this issue, especially on automating
these steps.)

Diagnostic information as produced by the program
Some programs collect information for diagnostic purposes while executing. If the
error occurs after a long series of events, it is often difﬁcult for the user to retrace
all steps from the program invocation to the failure.Therefore,the program can also
be set up to record important events in a log ﬁle, which can later be forwarded to,
and examined and reproduced by, the vendor. (In Chapter 8, we will learn more
about log ﬁles. Section 11.4 in Chapter 11 has more ideas on information that can
be collected and sampled from users.)
     If a program crashes, the operating system is frequently able to produce a stack
trace, a list of the functions active at the time of the program crash:
Thread 0 Crashed:
0 libSystem.B.dylib                  0x95fef4a6 mach_msg_trap + 10
1 libSystem.B.dylib                  0x95ff6c9c mach_msg + 72
2 com.apple.CoreFoundation           0x952990ce CFRunLoopRunSpecific + 1790
3 com.apple.CoreFoundation           0x95299cf8 CFRunLoopRunInMode + 88
4 com.apple.HIToolbox                0x92638480 RunCurrentEventLoopInMode
                                       + 283
5   com.apple.HIToolbox              0x92638299 ReceiveNextEventCommon + 374
6   com.apple.HIToolbox              0x9263810d BlockUntilNextEventMatching
                                       ListInMode + 106
7   com.apple.AppKit                 0x957473ed _DPSNextEvent + 657
8   com.apple.AppKit                 0x95746ca0 --- [NSApplication nextEvent
                                       MatchingMask:untilDate:inMode
                                       :dequeue:] + 128
9 com.apple.AppKit                   0x9573fcdb ---[NSApplication run] + 795
10 com.apple.AppKit                  0x9570cf14 NSApplicationMain + 574
11 com.apple.Preview                 0x000024ea start + 54
28   CHAPTER 2 Tracking Problems



         Not very surprising,the study of Bettenburg et al. found diagnostic information
     like logs and stack traces to be the second most important information in a bug
     report.

     A description of the experienced behavior
     These are the symptoms of the problem—that is, what has happened in contrast to
     the expected behavior. For example:
        The program crashed.

        As you are the bearer of bad news, it is important to remain neutral. Humor,
     sarcasm, or attacks will divert developers from their goal, which is increasing the
     product quality. Just stay with the facts.
        In the survey by Bettenburg et al., the experienced behavior was also rated
     important by developers, because it frequently “mimics steps to reproduce
     the bug.”

     A description of the expected behavior
     This describes what should have happened according to the user. For example:
        The program should have opened the file, or reported an error.

        In the study, developers considered the expected behavior to be of less impor-
     tance than steps to reproduce and diagnose information, possibly because the
     expected behavior is generally just the opposite of the (reported) experienced
     behavior.

     A one-line summary
     The one-line summary captures the essence of the problem. It is typically
     the basis for deciding the severity of the problem—that is, its impact on
     customers—and,consequently,the priority by which the problem will get ﬁxed. For
     example:
        Preview crashes when opening PDF document


     2.2.2 Product Facts
     All the facts discussed so far refer directly refer to the problem.The second category
     of facts refers to the product as well as the environment in which the problem
     occurred.

     The product release
     This is the version number or some other unique identiﬁer of the product. Using this
     information, the developer can recreate a local copy of the program in the version
                                                         2.2 Reporting Problems         29



as installed in the user’s environment. For example:
   Preview    4.1 (469.2.2), Build Info Preview-4690202∼2

The operating environment
Typically, this is version information about the operating system. As problems may
occur because of interactions between third-party components, information about
such components may be useful as well. For example:
   Mac OS X 10.5.5 (9F33)

    Again, if you can, try to generalize. Does the problem occur under different
operating environments, too? In our case, for instance, you might wish to check
alternate operating systems or alternate printers.

The system resources
Some problems occur only under limited resources. Therefore, it is advisable to
include information about your system’s memory, disk space, or other hardware
resources.
Model: MacBook1,1, BootROM MB11.0061.B03, 2 processors, Intel Core Duo, 2 GHz, 2 GB
Graphics:kHW_IntelGMA950Item, GMA 950, spdisplays_builtin, spdisplays_integrated_vram
Memory Module: BANK 0/DIMM0, 1 GB, DDR2 SDRAM, 667 MHz
Memory Module: BANK 1/DIMM1, 1 GB, DDR2 SDRAM, 667 MHz
AirPort: spairport_wireless_card_type_airport_extreme (0x168C, 0x86), 1.4.8.0
Bluetooth: Version 2.1.0f17, 2 service, 1 devices, 1 incoming serial ports
Serial ATA Device: Hitachi HTS722020K9SA00, 186,31 GB
Parallel ATA Device: MATSHITADVD-R   UJ-857
USB Device: Built-in iSight, Micron, high_speed, 500 mA
USB Device: HUAWEI Mobile, HUAWEI Technologies, full_speed, 500 mA
USB Device: Apple Internal Keyboard / Trackpad, Apple Computer, full_speed, 500 mA
USB Device: Bluetooth USB Host Controller, Apple, Inc., full_speed, 500 mA
USB Device: IR Receiver, Apple Computer, Inc., full_speed, 500 mA

    Looking on how system information impacts the failure can be helpful. If you
can (for instance, if you are a tester), try to generalize. Does the problem occur
under alternate releases, too? Does it occur in the most recent version?
    Knowing details about the product and its environment can be crucial
if the problem indeed depends on speciﬁc product or environment features.
In the study by Bettenburg et al., though, developers considered these facts
secondary:
   Hardware, and to some degree, [OS] ﬁelds are rarely needed as most our bugs
   are usually found in all platforms.


2.2.3 Querying Facts Automatically
Facts on the product and the environment can easily be queried automatically, as
products or systems include speciﬁc functionality or stand-alone tools to produce
30   CHAPTER 2 Tracking Problems




     FIGURE 2.1
     Mac OS talkback dialog. When a program fails, users can send relevant information to Apple.



     standardized problem reports. Figure 2.1 shows the talkback dialog of Mac OS,
     which appears whenever a program crashes. Clicking on “Send to Apple” forwards
     all relevant information (shown in the Comments, Problem Details, and System
     Conﬁguration ﬁelds) to the operating system vendor, who will in turn contact the
     developers.
         Talkback-like tools typically also forward internal information to the vendor—
     for instance, a full core dump, which records the state of the program at the
     moment it failed. Such core dumps can be read in and examined by developers
     (see Section 8.3.3 in Chapter 8 for details on how to perform such postmortem
     debugging).
                                                          2.3 Managing Problems           31



     In all of these cases, the privacy of the user is an important issue. It is very
advisable that the user be aware of whatever information is being sent to third
parties (such as the vendor). This is not as much of a risk with manually writ-
ten problem reports, but it becomes an increasing risk with information collected
automatically.
     Internal information (such as a core dump) cannot be interpreted by the user at
all, and thus brings the greatest risk of an unwanted breach of privacy. In addition,
log ﬁles about user interactions can be misused for all types of purposes, including
third-party attacks. For these reasons,users should be made aware of any information
your product may be collecting and forwarding. In addition, users should be able to
turn off all recording features.
     Privacy issues are less of a concern if a problem is discovered during testing. If
an in-house tester ﬁnds a problem, she should make every effort to ﬁx the problem.
This includes recording and providing as much information as possible.



2.3 MANAGING PROBLEMS
Most developer teams keep track of the current problems in their system using a sin-
gle “problem list”document that lists all open or unresolved problems to date. Such
a document is easy to set up and easy to maintain. However, associated problems
include the following:
■   Only one person at a time can work on the document. Exception: The doc-
    ument is in a version control system that allows parallel editing and later
    merging.
■   History of earlier (and ﬁxed) problems is lost.Exception: The document is in a
    version control system and evolves together with the product.
■   Does not scale. You cannot track hundreds of different issues in a simple text
    document.
   The alternative to keeping a document is to use a problem database, which
stores all problem reports. Problem databases scale up to a large number of
developers, users, and problems.
   Figure 2.2 shows an example of such a problem-tracking system. This is
BUGZILLA, the problem-tracking system for the MOZILLA Web browser. BUGZILLA
employs a Web browser as a user interface, which means that it can be accessed
from anywhere (and by anyone, as MOZILLA is an open-source project). You
can even install and adapt BUGZILLA for your own project. Note, though, that
BUGZILLA (and other problem-tracking systems) is meant for developers, not for
end users. Information provided from end users must be distilled and classiﬁed
before it can be entered into the database.
32   CHAPTER 2 Tracking Problems




     FIGURE 2.2
     The BUGZILLA problem database. The database organizes all problem reports for MOZILLA.



     2.4 CLASSIFYING PROBLEMS
     Assume we want to report a problem in BUGZILLA (either because we are expert
     users and know how to enter a problem on a web site or because we are in charge
     of processing a user problem report). To report a problem, we must supply the
     required information (Section 2.2 has details on how to report problems) and
     classify the problem. The attributes BUGZILLA uses to classify problems, discussed
     in the following, are typical for problem-tracking systems.
                                                            2.4 Classifying Problems          33



2.4.1 Severity
Each problem is assigned a severity that describes the impact of the problem on
the development or release process. BUGZILLA knows the following severity levels,
from those with the greatest impact to those with the least.
■   Blocker: Blocks development and/or testing work. This highest level of severity
    is also known as a showstopper.
■   Critical: Crashes, loss of data, and severe memory leak.
■   Major: Major loss of function.
■   Normal: This is the “standard” problem.
■   Minor: Minor loss of function, or other problem for which an easy workaround
    is present.
■   Trivial: Cosmetic problem such as misspelled words or misaligned text.
■   Enhancement: Request for enhancement. This means that the problem is not
    a failure at all, but rather a desired feature. Do not confuse this with missing
    functionality, though: If the product does not meet a requirement, this should be
    treated as a major problem.
     Ideally, a product is not shipped unless all “severe” problems have been ﬁxed—
that is, major, critical, or blocker problems have been resolved, and all requirements
are met. If a product is to be released at a ﬁxed date, optional functions that still
cause problems can be disabled.
     The severity also determines our wording. In general,the word problem is just as
a general term for a questionable property of the program run.A problem becomes a
failure as soon as it is considered an incorrect behavior of the system. It is a feature if
it is considered normal behavior (“It’s not a bug,it’s a feature!”). However,a missing
or incomplete feature can also be a problem, as indicated by the enhancement
category.


2.4.2 Priority
Each problem is assigned a speciﬁc priority. The higher the priority, the sooner
the problem is going to be addressed. The priority is typically deﬁned by the man-
agement. In fact, it is the main means for management to express what should
be done ﬁrst and what later. The importance of the priority attribute when it
comes to control the process of development and problem solving cannot be
overemphasized.


2.4.3 Identiﬁer
Each problem gets a unique identiﬁer (a PR number; in BUGZILLA, bug number)
such that developers can refer to it within the debugging process—in emails,change
logs, status reports, and attachments.
 34       CHAPTER 2 Tracking Problems



          2.4.4 Comments
          Every user and developer can attach comments to a problem report—for instance,
          to add information about the circumstances of the problem, to speculate about
          possible problem causes, to add ﬁrst ﬁndings,or to discuss how the problem should
          be ﬁxed.

          2.4.5 Notiﬁcation
          Developers and users can attach their email address to a problem report. They will
          get notiﬁed automatically every time the problem report changes.



          2.5 PROCESSING PROBLEMS
          Assume that someone has entered a new problem report into the problem database.
          This problem report must now be processed.During this process,the problem report
          runs through a life cycle (Figure 2.3)—from UNCONFIRMED to CLOSED. The position
          in the life cycle is determined by the state of the problem report. These states are
          described in the following.
          UNCONFIRMED: This is the state of any new problem report, as entered into the
              database. Let us introduce Olaf, who is a happy user of the Perfect Publishing
              Program—until it suddenly crashes. Thus:
              1. Olaf reports the failure to Sunny at customer support.
              2. Sunny enters the failure details as a new problem report into the problem
                 database. She reports how Olaf can reproduce the failure, ascertains the rel-
                 evant facts about Olaf’s conﬁguration, and sets the severity to “normal.” She
                 also reports Olaf’s contact address.
                                 Invalid
                                Duplicate                                             New   Status

                                                                                            Resulting
                                                                                  Fixed
                                                                                            resolution
                                             Invalid
                                            Duplicate

                                              Fixed
Unconfirmed      New         Assigned                       Resolved       Verified         Closed
                                             Wontfix
                                                              If resolution is Fixed
                                            Worksforme
                            Reopened




FIGURE 2.3
The life cycle of a problem in BUGZILLA. A problem starts UNCONFIRMED, is later ASSIGNED to a
speciﬁc developer, and ﬁnally CLOSED with a speciﬁc resolution.
                                                       2.5 Processing Problems         35



  3. The problem gets a PR number (say,PR 2074). Its initial state is UNCONFIRMED.
      Nobody has yet tried to reproduce it.
NEW: The problem report is valid.
   ■ It contains the relevant facts. (Otherwise, its resolution becomes INVALID.
     See material following.)
   ■ It is not an obvious duplicate of a known problem. (Otherwise, its resolution

     becomes DUPLICATE. See material following.)
       A NEW problem need not necessarily be reproducible. This is being taken care
   of in the remainder of the life cycle. In our example, programmer Violet may be
   in charge of checking problem reports. Finding that PR 2074 was not known
   before, she sets its state to NEW.
ASSIGNED: The problem is not yet resolved, but is already assigned to a developer
   (in BUGZILLA, to the bug owner). Mr. Poe, the manager, asks Violet to solve PR
   2074. The state is now ASSIGNED.
RESOLVED: The problem is resolved.The resolution tells what has become (for now)
   of the problem report.
  ■ FIXED: The problem is ﬁxed.

  ■ INVALID: The problem is not a problem, or does not contain the relevant

      facts.
  ■ DUPLICATE: The problem is a duplicate of an existing problem.

  ■ WONTFIX: The problem described is a problem that will never be ﬁxed.

     This may also be the case for problems that turn out to be features rather
      than failures. The following is a WONTFIX example. The MOZILLA browser
      does not display ALT texts for images as tooltips, which many consider a
      problem. However, the MOZILLA developers say this behavior is mandated
      by Web standards and thus will not ﬁx the “problem.” (See bug #25537 at
      www.bugzilla.mozilla.org.)
  ■ WORKSFORME: All attempts at reproducing this problem were futile. If more

      information appears later, the problem may be reopened. If the resolution is
      FIXED, the ﬁx must be veriﬁed (state VERIFIED) and ﬁnally delivered (state
      CLOSED). In our example, let’s assume Violet is unable to reproduce PR 2074
      in her environment. In this case, the following happens:
     1. Violet documents her attempts in additional comments to the problem
         report, and sets the resolution to WORKSFORME and the state to RESOLVED.
         However,could it be that Olaf has the product conﬁgured to use the metric
         system? She asks Sunny whether she could get further data.
     2. Sunny requests further information from Olaf and sets the state of PR 2074
         to REOPENED.
     3. Violet is still responsible for PR 2074 (state ASSIGNED). With the new data,
         she can ﬁnally reproduce and ﬁx the problem.The state becomes RESOLVED;
         the resolution is FIXED.
36   CHAPTER 2 Tracking Problems



     VERIFIED: The problem is ﬁxed.The ﬁx has been veriﬁed as successful.The problem
        remains VERIFIED until the ﬁx has been delivered to the user (for instance, by
        shipping a new release). Tester Klaus reviews Violet’s ﬁx. He gives his okay to
        integrate the ﬁx in the current production release.The state of PR 2074 becomes
        VERIFIED.
     CLOSED: A new release (or patch) of the product was shipped. In this release, the
        problem no longer occurs. As soon as the ﬁx is delivered to Olaf, the PR 2074
        state is CLOSED.
     REOPENED: If a problem occurs again, it is assigned a state of REOPENED rather than
        NEW. It must be assigned again. In our example,if further users contact customer
        support about the problem, Sunny can look up the problem in the problem-
        tracking system and point them to the new release.

        All of these states and resolutions can (and should) be adapted to the process at
     hand. If there is no independent veriﬁcation,for example,reports skip the VERIFIED
     state. If problems are ﬁxed at the user’s site (skipping shipment), the RESOLVED
     and CLOSED states become synonyms. On the other hand, if additional clearance is
     required before a ﬁx gets accepted this can be expressed by additional states and
     resolutions.



     2.6 MANAGING PROBLEM TRACKING
     A good problem-tracking system is the basis for all daily work on problems and
     failures. If nobody ﬁles problem reports, it is useless. If nobody marks problems as
     resolved,it will quickly be ﬁlled with outdated information.Therefore,the following
     issues should be resolved:
     ■   Who ﬁles problem reports? This could be support personnel only. In general,
         though, it is probably useful if any developer can add new entries. Advanced
         users and beta testers may also be enabled to ﬁle problem reports.
     ■   Who classiﬁes problem reports? The severity of a problem can be extracted
         from the initial report. Sometimes, the severity is determined only after the
         problem could be reproduced.
     ■   Who sets priorities? To determine the priority of a problem, management
         must assess the impact of a problem—that is, not only its severity but the
         following:
         – Its likelihood
         – The number of users affected
         – The potential damage
            Thus, the priority need not be correlated with the severity of a problem.
         A “blocker” problem in an alpha release may have lower priority than a “major”
         problem in a widely distributed product.
                                                 2.7 Requirements as Problems            37



        Many organizations use a software change control board (SCCB) to set prior-
    ities. This is a group of people who track problem reports and take care of their
    handling. Such a group typically consists of developers,testers,and conﬁguration
    managers.
■   Who takes care of the problem? All problem-tracking systems allow assigning
    problems to individual developers. This is also the task of an SCCB or like group.
■   Who closes issues? This can be the SCCB or like group, the individual tester, or
    some quality assurance instance that veriﬁes ﬁxes (as in the scenario described
    previously).
■   What’s the life cycle of a problem? The BUGZILLA model, shown in Figure 2.3,
    is typical of problem databases but is by no means the only possible one.
    Depending on your individual needs, one can design alternate states and
    transitions. Problem-tracking systems may be conﬁgured to incorporate such
    processes.
     Once a problem-tracking system is well integrated into your development pro-
cess, you can use it to organize all aspects of software development. As it always
gives you insights about the current state of the product, a problem-tracking system
is a great management asset when it comes to decide whether a system is ready
for release. A problem-tracking system can also be used for historical insights—that
is, in hindsight, ﬁnding out what the most important problems were and how they
could have been avoided. We will talk more about this role of problem tracking in
Chapter 16.



2.7 REQUIREMENTS AS PROBLEMS
Problem-tracking systems are frequently used during the entire development of
the product. In fact, they can be used from the very start, even when the product
does not exist. In this setting, one enters requirements into the problem-tracking
database, implying that each requirement not yet met is a problem. The severity of
the problem indicates the importance of the requirement. Central requirements not
yet met are marked as “major” problems. Minor or optional requirements could be
marked as “requests for enhancement.”
   As requirements are typically broken down into subrequirements, the problem-
tracking system should have a way of organizing problems hierarchically. That is,
there should be a way of decomposing problems into subproblems, and of mark-
ing the problems as FIXED as soon as all subproblems are FIXED. In this fashion,
requirement 1 is the product itself, and problem 1 thus becomes “the product is
missing.”As requirement 1 is broken down into a large number of individual fea-
tures, so is the problem—with one subproblem for every feature. The product is
ready for shipping when all problems are resolved—indicated by problem 1 being
FIXED, which implies that all features are now implemented.
38   CHAPTER 2 Tracking Problems



      BUG STORY 3
      Tracking Milk Issues at Microsoft
      The following bug report is purported to originate from Microsoft’s Excel group from
      1994. Aliases have been removed. The T : indicates that the person was a tester,
      whereas D: stands for developer and P: for program manager.
       ------------------- ACTIVE - 05/12/94 - T:XXXXXX ----------------------
       : Go to the kitchen
       : Grab a Darigold chocolate milk carton
       : Read the ingredients list

       --! Either Darigold has discovered a chocolate cow, or something’s
         missing from the ingredients list. It only lists milk, vitamin A,
         and vitamin D.    So where does the chocolate/sugar flavor come from?
       ------------------- ACTIVE - 05/12/94 - T:XXXXXX ----------------------
       Moo info:
       : Grab a Darigold 2% milk carton (NOT chocolate)
       : Read the ingredients
       --! Says it contains Cocoa, Sugar, Guar gum ...
       Looks like the Chocolate
         and 2% ingredient lists have been swapped.
       -------------- ASSIGNED to D:XXXXX - 05/12/94 - D:XXXXXXXX ------------
       looks like an internals problem?
       -------------- ASSIGNED to D:XXXXX - 05/12/94 - D:XXXXX ---------------
       UI Problem. I’ll take it.
       -------------- ASSIGNED to D:XXXXX - 05/12/94 - D:XXXXX ---------------
       They don’t make milk at the Issaquah Darigold. Calling Ranier Ave.
       -------------- ASSIGNED to D:XXXXX - 05/12/94 - D:XXXXX ---------------
       I can’t repro. Do you have the wrong MILKINTL.DLL?
       -------------- ASSIGNED to D:XXXXX - 05/12/94 - T:XXXXXXXX ------------
       By design? I think new US health labeling went into effect this month.
       -------------- ASSIGNED to D:XXXXX - 05/12/94 - D:XXXXX ---------------
       Wrong Department. Transferred from Distribution to Production.
       Left voice mail for "Frank".
       -------------- ASSIGNED to D:XXXXX - 05/12/94 - D:XXXXX ---------------
       Reproduces in the Development Kitchen. Need a native
       build of the Kitchen ...
       -------------- ASSIGNED to D:XXXXX - 05/12/94 - D:XXXXX ---------------
       This is a feature. IntelliSense labeling knew that you didn’t want to feel
       guilty about the chocolate in the milk, so it didn’t list it on the box.
       -------------- ASSIGNED to D:XXXXX - 05/12/94 - D:XXXX ---------------
       Recommend postpone. Reading the ingredients is not a common user
       scenario ...
       -------------- RESOLVED - WON’T FIX - 05/12/94 - P:XXXXX --------------
       Fixing the package is just a band-aid. We need to come up with a solution
       that addresses the real problem in 96. My recommendation is
       chocolate cows.

       Please close and assign to DARIGOLD.
                                                           2.8 Managing Duplicates           39



   A good problem-tracking system can summarize the problem database in the
form of statistics (how many problems are still open, how many problems are being
assigned to whom, and so on). A problem-tracking system may thus become the
primary tool for organizing the debugging process, or the development process in
general.The key is that managers check the problem-tracking system for outstanding
issues, and assign appropriate priorities for developers. Eventually, your problem-
tracking database will be a universal tool for resolving all types of problems—even
those only remotely related to the product at hand (see Bug Story 3).




2.8 MANAGING DUPLICATES
If your problem-tracking system is well used, you may experience a metaproblem:
a lot of problem reports. In September 2003 the MOZILLA problem database listed
roughly 8,300 UNCONFIRMED problems waiting to be assigned and resolved.
     One reason for such a large number of problem reports is duplicates. If your
program has several users and a defect,chances are that several users will experience
similar failures. If all of these users send in problem reports, your problem-tracking
system will quickly ﬁll up with similar reports, all related to the same defect.
     For instance,if your Web browser crashes whenever it tries to render a dropdown
list users will send in problem reports: “I opened Web page X, and it crashed,”
“I opened Web page Y ,and it crashed,”and so on. Processing all of these reports and
ﬁnding out that each of the mentioned Web pages includes a dropdown list takes a
lot of time.
     A partial solution to this problem is to identify duplicates. The idea is that within
the problem-tracking system one can mark problems as a duplicate of another prob-
lem. Submitters of new problem reports can then be encouraged to search the
problem database for similar problems ﬁrst. If a similar problem is found, the new
problem can be marked as a duplicate. When the initial problem is ﬁxed, the devel-
oper can close the duplicates where the same failure cause occurs. Unfortunately,
it is not always easy to spot duplicates. This is due to two conﬂicting goals:
   ■ A problem report includes as many facts as possible, in that any of them may
     be relevant for reproducing the problem.
   ■ Identifying duplicates requires as few facts as possible, because this makes it

     easier to spot the similarity.
    The solution here is simpliﬁcation—that is, to simplify a problem report such
that only the relevant facts remain. We will come back to this issue in Section 5.1,
on simplifying problems. Automated methods are presented in Chapter 5.
    Even if all duplicates have been resolved, however, your database will eventually
ﬁll up with unresolved problem reports—problems that could not be reproduced,
problems that may be ﬁxed in a later version, and low-priority problems. This is less
a problem of space or performance (modern databases can easily cope with millions
40   CHAPTER 2 Tracking Problems



     of problem reports) than of maintenance, as your developers wade again and again
     through this swamp of unresolved bugs. Having thousands of unresolved problems
     is also bad for morale. The solution is to clean up the database by searching for
     obsolete problems. A problem report could be declared obsolete if, for instance:
        ■ The problem will never be ﬁxed—for instance, because the program is no
          longer supported.
        ■ The problem is old and has occurred only once.
        ■ The problem is old and has occurred only internally.

        Obsolete problem reports should show up only if explicitly searched for. If
     they ever show up again, you can recycle them by making them nonobsolete. In
     BUGZILLA, problems that will never be ﬁxed are assigned a WONTFIX resolution.



     2.9 RELATING PROBLEMS AND FIXES
     Few products ever came out as a single version.Thus,whenever users report a prob-
     lem they must state the version of the product in which the problem occurred.
     Without this, developers will not know which version to use when trying to
     reproduce the problem.
         But even with a version identiﬁer,are you prepared to access the speciﬁc version
     as released to your user? This means not only the binaries as shipped, but every
     source that went into this speciﬁc release and all tools in their speciﬁc versions
     that were used to produce the binary. This is one of the key issues of software
     conﬁguration management: to be able to recreate any given conﬁguration any
     time.
         To keep track of versions and conﬁgurations is something far too error prone to
     be done manually. Instead, use a version control system to support the task. Using
     version control has few costs and many beneﬁts. Not using version control, though,
     makes your development process risky, chaotic, and generally unmanageable.
         So, how do you manage your versions in order to track bugs? Simple:Whenever
     a new version is shipped, mark its source base with an appropriate tag. Use this
     tag to recreate the source base, and together with the source base, the product
     itself.
         Another good thing about version control systems is the management of
     branches for storing ﬁxes. The basic idea is to separate the evolution into two
     parts:
        ■   A main trunk in which new features are tested and added.
        ■   Branches in which ﬁxes (and only ﬁxes) are added to stable versions.
        This separation allows vendors to ship out new ﬁxed versions of stable prod-
     ucts while developing new features for the next major release. The use of tags and
     branches is illustrated in Figure 2.4.
                                                            2.9 Relating Problems and Fixes    41



                                                 Release    Release
                                                   1.0        1.1

                        File A                       1.1


                                                             1.1.1.1


                        File B       1.1             1.2      1.3


                                                             1.2.1.1   1.2.1.2


                                 Version successor
                                 Common configuration tag


FIGURE 2.4
Tags and branches in version control. As a system progresses, individual releases are tagged
such that they can be reconstructed on demand.


   A product consists of two ﬁles, which have evolved independently into multiple
revisions. Consider Figure 2.4. The initial release of the system, indicated by the
dotted line,consisted of revision 1.1 of ﬁle A and revision 1.2 of ﬁle B. In the version
control system, this is reﬂected by an appropriate tag of these revisions. Since then,
ﬁle B has evolved into revision 1.3 with new features, but is as yet untested.
   When a user now reports a problem that calls for a ﬁx, what do we do? Do
we ship the new, untested conﬁguration with ﬁle B included? Usually not. Instead,
based on the initial release, we create a branch for ﬁles A and B, containing the new
versions 1.1.1.1 and 1.2.1.1, respectively. This branch holds only the indispensable
ﬁxes for the initial release, which can then be released as minor service updates
(shown as release 1.1 in the ﬁgure). New, risky features still go to the main trunk.
Eventually, all ﬁxes from the branch can be merged back into the main trunk such
that they will also be present in the next major releases. As maintainers routinely
want to check whether a certain problem has been ﬁxed in a speciﬁc release, be
sure to relate problem reports to changes as follows:
■   Within the problem-tracking system, identify the change in version control that
    ﬁxed the problem. For instance, attach the branch identiﬁer as a comment to
    the problem report:
       Problem fixed in RELEASE_1_1_BRANCH
■   Within the version control system, identify the problem report number that is
    addressed by a speciﬁc change. This can be done in the log message given when
    the change is committed:
       Fix: null pointer could cause crash (PR 2074)
42   CHAPTER 2 Tracking Problems




     FIGURE 2.5
     Open issues as reported by the TRAC system. The report shows which problems persist for
     which version of the product.
                                              2.10 Relating Problems and Tests           43



    Such a relationship between problem tracking and version control works best
when it is established automatically. Some version control systems integrate with
problem-tracking systems such that the relationship between problems and ﬁxes
is maintained automatically. This allows for queries to determine which problem
reports have occurred or ﬁxed in which release.
    As an example, consider the report of the TRAC system, shown in Figure 2.5.
TRAC is a lightweight system that integrates version control and problem tracking.
Its report shows which problems still persist in which version of the product.



2.10 RELATING PROBLEMS AND TESTS
Many developers use problem-tracking systems not only for problems as reported by
end users but also for problems encountered in-house.That is,as soon as a developer
stumbles across a problem, he or she reports it just as if an end user had told him
or her about the problem.
    In principle, this is a good thing, in that no problem remains unreported. How-
ever,the main way in which developers ﬁnd problems is by testing the program,and
this induces a conﬂict between test outcomes and problem reports. Should a failing
test be tracked in the problem database? And if so,how are we going to synchronize
the problem database with the test outcomes?
    Unless you have a problem-tracking system that neatly integrates with your test
suite, I recommend keeping test outcomes separate from problem reports. There
are several reasons for doing so:
■   Test outcomes occur frequently—possibly (and hopefully) far more frequently
    than user’s problem reports. Storing these test outcomes in the problem database
    would quickly ﬂood the database—and divert from the actual problems in the
    ﬁeld.
■   If you use automated testing (see Chapter 3), you can at any time check test
    outcomes for any version, at the press of a button. Thus, there is no need for
    storing that information.
■   Suppose a test fails. If you can ﬁnd the defect and ﬁx it right away, there is no
    need to enter a record in the problem-tracking system.
    All of this boils down to one point: Test cases make problem reports obsolete.
If a problem occurs during development, do not enter it into the problem-tracking
system. Instead, write a test case that exposes the problem. This way, the test case
will show that the problem is still present,and you can always check for the problem
by running the test.
    You can always use the problem-tracking system, though, for storing ideas and
feature requests—that is,for anything that does not immediately translate into code
or a test case. As soon as you start to implement the feature request, start writing a
  44      CHAPTER 2 Tracking Problems



          test case that exposes the lack of the feature, and close the entry in the problem-
          tracking system. Once the feature is implemented, the successive test case can be
          used to determine whether it meets expectations.




          2.11 CONCEPTS
          Reports about problems encountered in the ﬁeld are stored in a problem database
          and are classiﬁed with respect to status and severity.
             A problem report must contain all information that is relevant to reproduce the
          problem.

How To To obtain the relevant problem information,set up a standard set of items that users
           must provide (see also Section 2.2, on reporting problems). This includes:
           ■ Problem history

           ■ Diagnostic information
           ■ Expected behavior
           ■ Experienced behavior
           ■ Product release
           ■ Operating environment

          To write an effective problem report, make sure the report:
             ■ Is well structured
             ■ Is reproducible
             ■ Has a descriptive one-line summary

             ■ Is as simple as possible
             ■ Is as general as possible
             ■ Is neutral and stays with the facts

              For details, see Section 2.2.
          Products can be set up to collect and forward information that may be relevant to
              reproduce the problem. Be aware of privacy issues, though.
          A typical life cycle of a problem starts with a status of UNCONFIRMED. It ends with
              CLOSED and a speciﬁc resolution such as FIXED or WORKSFORME (Figure 2.3).
          To organize the debugging process,have a software change control board that uses
              the problem database to:
             ■  Keep track of resolved and unresolved problems
             ■  Assign a priority to individual problems
              ■ Assign problems to individual developers

          To track requirements, one can also use a problem-tracking system. Each require-
             ment not yet met is a problem.
          Keep problem tracking simple. If it gets in the way, people won’t use it.
                                                                        2.12 Tools      45



To restore released versions, use a version control system to tag all conﬁgurations
    as they are released to users.
To separate ﬁxes and features,use a version control system to keep ﬁxes in branches
    and features in the main trunk.
To relate problems and ﬁxes, establish conventions to relate problem reports to
    changes, and vice versa (Section 2.9). Advanced version control systems inte-
    grate with problem-tracking systems to maintain this relationship automatically.
To relate problems and tests, make a problem report obsolete as soon as a test case
    exists. When a problem occurs, prefer writing test cases to entering problem
    reports.



2.12 TOOLS
BUGZILLA. The BUGZILLA problem-tracking system can be found at http://www.
   bugzilla.org/.
       Its speciﬁc incarnation for MOZILLA is available for browsing at http://
   bugzilla.mozilla.org/.
PHPBUGTRACKER. PHPBUGTRACKER is a lightweight problem-tracking system
   that is simpler to install and manage than BUGZILLA . It can be found at
   http://phpbt.sourceforge.net/.
ISSUETRACKER. Like PHPBUGTRACKER,ISSUETRACKER aims to be a lightweight
   problem tracker, with a special focus on being user friendly. If you want to
   toy with a problem-tracking system at your site, PHPBUGTRACKER or ISSUE-
   TRACKER might be your choice. ISSUETRACKER can be found at http://www.
   issue-tracker.com/.
TRAC . TRAC is another lightweight problem-tracking system. Its special feature is
   that it integrates with version control. This makes it easier to track problems
   across multiple versions. Just as PHPBUGTRACKER and ISSUETRACKER ,TRAC
   is open-source software, but with optional commercial support. TRAC can be
   found at http://trac.edgewall.org/.
SOURCEFORGE. The SOURCEFORGE project provides automated project organi-
   zation beyond simple problem tracking. It includes facilities such as discussion
   forums,public version archives,user management,and mailing lists. It is available
   to open-source projects.A simple registration sufﬁces,and there is no installation
   hassle. SOURCEFORGE is also available as a commercial version to be installed
   at other sites and to manage commercial projects. SOURCEFORGE can be found
   at http://www.sourceforge.net/.
GFORGE. GFORGE is a fork of the original SOURCEFORGE code. Just like
   SOURCEFORGE, it provides problem tracking, discussion forums, public version
   archives,user management,mailing lists,and much more. In contrast to SOURCE-
   FORGE, the GFORGE people do not host projects. Instead, you install the
46   CHAPTER 2 Tracking Problems



        GFORGE software at your site. (Commercial support is available.) If you want
        a single open-source package that manages the entire development life cycle,
        GFORGE delivers. GFORGE can be found at http://www.gforge.org/.



     2.13 FURTHER READING
     Regarding problem-tracking systems, there is not too much information available
     except from those provided by vendors. Mirrer (2000) addresses the issue of obso-
     lete test cases. For him,organizing a problem-tracking system is like“organizing your
     socks”: Once in a while, an overﬂowing sock drawer has to be cleaned up.
         Kolawa (2002) comments on the relationship between problem-tracking systems
     and testing. He states that problem-tracking systems“should be used exclusively as a
     place to store feedback when you cannot immediately modify the code.”Otherwise,
     you should create a reproducible test case.
         Advanced problem-tracking systems can do an even better job of integrating with
     version control systems. The Software Conﬁguration Management FAQ posting of
     the comp.software.config-mgmt newsgroup contains a large list of problem-
     tracking systems and their integration within software conﬁguration management.
     The newsgroup can be found at http://www.daveeaton.com/scm/.
        The award-winning study of Bettenburg (2008) was one of the ﬁrst to survey
     what developers need in a bug report; it is worth a read. It is available at the ACM
     digital library at http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1453101.1453146.



     EXERCISES
     2.1 Write a bug report for the sample problem (Section 1.1). Justify the amount
         of information you gave.
     2.2 Visit the MOZILLA problem-tracking site at http://bugzilla.mozilla.org/, and
         answer the following questions:
         (a) How many problems have been entered as NEW into BUGZILLA in the past
              three days?
         (b) How many of these are critical (or even blocking)?
         (c) How many of these are invalid? Why?
         (d) How many unresolved or unconﬁrmed problems are there in the currently
              released version?
         (e) Which is the worst currently unresolved problem?
          (f) According to problem priority, which problem should you address ﬁrst as
              a programmer?
                                                     2.13 Further Reading      47



2.3 What are the major differences between a dedicated problem-tracking sys-
    tem such as BUGZILLA and a general organizing and messaging tool such as
    Microsoft Outlook?
2.4 Which other problems (in addition to software) could be managed using a
    problem-tracking system?




 Six Stages of Debugging
    1. That can’t happen.
    2. That doesn’t happen on my machine.
    3. That shouldn’t happen.
    4. Why does that happen?
    5. Oh, I see.
    6. How did that ever work?
                                                                         CHAPTER


Making Programs Fail
                                                                            3
Before a program can be debugged,we must set it up such that it can be tested—that
is, executed with the intent to make it fail. In this chapter, we review basic testing
techniques, with a special focus on automation and isolation.



3.1 TESTING FOR DEBUGGING
User reports are not the only way of learning about problems. Typically, most prob-
lems (and in the best of all worlds, all problems) are found by testing at the
developer’s site before they ever could be experienced by a user. Testing is the
process of executing a program with the intent of producing some problem. Once
such a problem has been found by testing, the process of tracing down the defect
and ﬁxing it is the same as if the problem had been reported by a user (except
that problems found by testing, or any other means of quality assurance, are less
embarrassing, and generally much cheaper to ﬁx). First comes the problem (from a
test or a user), then comes the debugging.
   This classical view of testing is called testing for validation. It is geared toward
uncovering yet unknown problems. A great deal of research revolves around the
question of how to test programs such that the tests uncover as many problems
as possible. We summarize the basics in Section 3.8. In the context of debugging,
though, testing also has its place. However, it is geared toward uncovering a known
problem. Such testing for debugging is required at many stages of the debugging
process, and thus throughout this book:
   ■ One must create a test to reproduce the problem (see Chapter 4).
   ■ One must rerun the test multiple times to simplify the problem (see
     Chapter 5).
   ■ One must rerun the test to observe the run (see Chapter 8).

   ■ One must rerun the test to verify whether the ﬁx has been successful (see

     Section 15.4 in Chapter 15).
   ■ One must rerun the test before each new release such that the problem (or a

     similar one) will not occur in the future. This is also called regression testing
     (see Chapter 16).                                                                    49
50   CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail



         As testing occurs so frequently while debugging, it is a good thing to automate
     it as much as possible. In general, by using automation, more thorough tests can be
     achieved with less effort. Automation:
        ■ Allows the reuse of existing tests (for instance, to test a new version of a
          program).
        ■ Allows one to perform tests that are difﬁcult or impossible to carry out

          manually (such as massive random tests).
        ■ Makes tests repeatable.

        ■ Increases conﬁdence in the software.


     All of these beneﬁts apply to validation as well as to debugging, such as the previ-
     ously listed.
         Automation not only streamlines the “classic” testing and debugging tasks, but
     enables additional automated debugging techniques, such as those discussed in
     this book:
        ■ Automated tests enable automated simpliﬁcation of test cases (see
          Chapter 5).
        ■ One can use automated tests to isolate failure causes automatically,

          including:
          – Failure-inducing input (see Section 13.5 in Chapter 13)
          – Failure-inducing code changes (see Section 13.7 in Chapter 13)
          – Failure-inducing thread schedules (see Section 13.6 in Chapter 13)
          – Failure-inducing program states (see Section 14.4 in Chapter 14)
        In this chapter, we will thus focus on how to set up automated tests that
     support our (automated and nonautomated) debugging tasks. We examine the
     question:

       HOW CAN WE LEVERAGE TESTS TO SUPPORT DEBUGGING?




     3.2 CONTROLLING THE PROGRAM
     Consider a real-world example, related to the MOZILLA Web browser—or more
     speciﬁcally, its HTML layout engine named Gecko. In July 1999, two years before
     the ﬁnal completion of MOZILLA 1.0, BUGZILLA (the MOZILLA problem database)
     listed more than 370 open problem reports—problem reports that were not
     even reproduced. At the same time, test automation was in bad shape. To test
     MOZILLA , developers essentially had to visit a number of critical Web pages,
     such as www.cnn.com/, and (visually) check whether the layout and functionality
     was okay.
                                                   3.2 Controlling the Program        51




EXAMPLE 3.1: MOZILLA problem report 24735
Ok the following operations cause mozilla to crash consistently
on my machine

-> Start mozilla
-> Go to bugzilla.mozilla.org
-> Select search for bug
-> Print to file setting the bottom and right margins to .50
   (I use the file /var/tmp/netscape.ps)
-> Once it’s done printing do the exact same thing again on
   the same file (/var/tmp/netscape.ps)
-> This causes the browser to crash with a segfault



    Example 3.1 shows the problem report we want to turn into an automated test
case. Under certain conditions,MOZILLA crashes when printing a page. How do we
automate this sequence of actions? In general, an automated test must simulate the
environment of the program—that is,the test must provide the program’s input and
assess the program’s output. Simulating an environment can be very tricky, though.
If the environment involves users who interact with the program, the automated
test must simulate actual users (including all of their capabilities).
    Figure 3.1 shows the steps our user simulation must conduct, which are:
   1. Launch MOZILLA.
   2. Open the Open Web Location dialog.
   3. Load bugzilla.mozilla.org.
   4. Open the Print dialog.
   5. Enter appropriate print settings.
   6. Invoke the actual printing.
However,our user simulation must also synchronize its actions with the application.
For instance,the simulation can“click”in the dialog only after it has popped up.The
same applies for the second printing, which can only start after the ﬁrst printing
is done. Thus, the user simulation must not only provide input but interpret the
output.
    Such efforts can be avoided by identifying alternate interfaces, where control
and assessment are easier to automate. Figure 3.2 shows a typical decomposition of
a program into three layers:
   ■ The presentation layer handles the interaction with the user (or whatever
     constitutes the environment of the program).
   ■ The functionality layer encapsulates the actual functionality of the program,

     independent of a speciﬁc presentation.
   ■ The unit layer splits the functionality across multiple units, cooperating to

     produce a greater whole.
52   CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail




     FIGURE 3.1
     Making MOZILLA print (and crash). This takes just six easy steps.




                                 User                         Automated test

                                                        (1)         (2)    (3)


                                    Presentation



                                        Functionality


                                                                                 Execution


                          Unit             Unit                     Unit
                                                                                 Result


     FIGURE 3.2
     Testing layers. A program can be tested (1) at the presentation layer, (2) at the functionality
     layer, or (3) at the unit layer.
                                           3.3 Testing at the Presentation Layer         53



   Whereas the user (and the environment) interact only with the presentation
layer, an automated test can use all three layers for automating execution and for
retrieving and assessing results. Each layer requires individual techniques, though,
and brings its own beneﬁts and drawbacks for testing and debugging. In the next
three sections,we discuss testing at the individual layers and check for the following
features:
   ■ Ease of execution: How easy is it to get control over program execution?
   ■ Ease of interaction: How easy is it to interact with the program?
   ■ Ease of result assessment: How can we check results against expectations?
   ■ Lifetime of test case: How robust is my test when it comes to program

     changes?



3.3 TESTING AT THE PRESENTATION LAYER
Let’s start with the presentation layer, where the program interacts with its envi-
ronment. How does one test at the presentation layer? Basically, one simulates the
input and monitors the output. Depending on the nature of the input and output,
this can be done at multiple abstraction levels. For a networking device,for instance,
we can capture input and output at the data link layer (monitoring and sending
individual bits between two ends of a physical connection), or at the transport
layer (monitoring and sending data packets between two machines). The higher
the abstraction level, the more details are abstracted away, which makes it easier to
simulate interaction. On the other hand, one risks abstracting away the very details
that cause a failure.
    As a more detailed (and frequent) example of abstraction levels, let’s take a
look at user interaction. User interaction can be simulated at two abstraction lev-
els: at a low level (expressing interaction as a sequence of mouse and keyboard
events) or at a higher level,denoting interaction using graphical user controls of the
application.

3.3.1 Low-Level Interaction
At the lowest abstraction level,user input becomes a stream of mouse and keyboard
events. Such event streams can be captured (i.e., recorded from the input devices)
and replayed, substituting the stream from actual input devices by the previously
recorded stream.
    As an example, Example 3.2 shows a script recorded by the open-source tool
ANDROID (not to be confused with Google’s Android operating system) to repro-
duce the MOZILLA interaction shown in Figure 3.1. To make it more user readable,
the script has been simpliﬁed to the relevant events.
    Each of these send_xevents command simulates a user action. The command
   send_xevents @550,170 click 1
54   CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail




     EXAMPLE 3.2: ANDROID script to make MOZILLA print. This script simulates
     user interaction at a low level by means of keyboard and mouse interaction.
     # 1. Launch mozilla and wait for 2 seconds
     exec mozilla &
     send_xevents wait 2000

     # 2. Open URL dialog (Shift+Control+L)
     send_xevents keydn Control_L
     send_xevents keydn Shift_L
     send_xevents key L
     send_xevents keyup Shift_L
     send_xevents keyup Control_L
     send_xevents wait 500

     # 3. Load bugzilla.mozilla.org
     #    and wait for 5 seconds
     send_xevents @400,100
     send_xevents type {http://bugzilla.mozilla.org}
     send_xevents key Return
     send_xevents wait 5000

     # 4. Open Print Dialog (Ctrl+P)
     send_xevents @400,100
     send_xevents keydn Control_L
     send_xevents key P
     send_xevents keyup Control_L
     send_xevents wait 500

     # 5. Click on "Print to File"
     send_xevents @550,170 click 1

     # 6. Print (Return)
     send_xevents key Return
     send_xevents wait 5000



     tells ANDROID to move the mouse pointer to position (550,170), and then to simu-
     late a click of mouse button 1 (the left mouse button). Likewise, the command key
     simulates the press of a key, and type is shorthand for typing several keys in a row.
     The commands keydn and keyup are handy for simulating modiﬁers such as Shift,
     Alt, or Ctrl that need to be held down while other keys are pressed.
         As nobody wants to read or maintain tests that deal with absolute screen
     coordinates, such event scripts are largely write-only. Furthermore, any recorded
     information is fragile: The slightest change in the user’s display or the program’s
     interface makes the recorded scripts obsolete.
         To illustrate the fragility, just try to invoke the script twice in a row: The second
     time the script executes, the ﬁle to be printed to already exists, and thus MOZILLA
     wants special conﬁrmation before overwriting the ﬁle. This extra dialog, though, is
                                           3.3 Testing at the Presentation Layer        55



not handled in our script and thus will fail miserably. Other changes that quickly
make the script obsolete include a different placement of the MOZILLA main win-
dow or its dialogs (all coordinates in the script are absolute) and changes in font
size, screen size, layout, user language, or even interaction speed.
    If we record and replay nonuser interaction at a low level, such as data ﬂow
on a network, any changes to the program or the protocol will also make recorded
scripts quickly obsolete. Nonetheless,such recorded information can be very useful
for automating user interaction again and again—as long as it is used for one single
debugging session in one speciﬁc environment.

3.3.2 System-Level Interaction
One way of overcoming the problem of fragility (Section 3.3.1) is to control not
only the single application but the entire machine. For this purpose, one typically
uses a virtual machine system that simulates an entire machine as software. The
virtual machine FAUMachine, for instance, allows us to simulate many types of input
and can even inject faults such as simulated hardware defects. Example 3.3 shows
a simple script.
    Use of virtual machines for testing and debugging typically requires that a
number of well-deﬁned virtual machines be available. Therefore, virtual machines
are nice to have if one desires or requires complete control at the system level.
Although a large set of virtual machines requires careful administration, it is still
easier to administer and conﬁgure virtual rather than real machines.

3.3.3 Higher-Level Interaction
A more comfortable way of making user interaction scripts more robust against
changes and thus more persistent is to choose a higher abstraction level—that
is, controlling the application not by means of coordinates but by actual graphi-
cal user controls. As an example, consider Example 3.4. It shows a script in the
APPLESCRIPT language that makes MOZILLA on Mac OS load and print the page
bugzilla.mozilla.org. APPLESCRIPT is designed to be readable by end users. The
¬ character lets you split one line of script onto two.


EXAMPLE 3.3: A script for automating execution of a virtual FAUmachine. This
script interacts at the system level, simulating the hardware of a real machine
# Power on the machine and wait for 5s
power <= true; wait for 5000;

# Click mouse button 1
m_b1 <= true; wait for 300; m_b1 <= false;

# Click the CDROM change button
cdctrl’shortcut_out_add("/cdrom%change/…");
56   CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail



     EXAMPLE 3.4: APPLESCRIPT makes MOZILLA print. This script excerpt inter-
     acts with MOZILLA at a higher level. It refers to named GUI elements to simulate
     actions.
     -- 1. Activate mozilla
     tell application "mozilla" to activate

     -- 2. Open URL dialog via menu
     tell application "System Events"
       tell process "mozilla"
         tell menu bar 1
           tell menu bar item "File"
              click menu item "Open Web Location"
           end tell
         end tell
       end tell
     end tell

      -- 3. Load bugzilla.mozilla.org
      --     and wait for 5 seconds
      tell window "Open Web Location"
         tell sheet 1
           set value of text field 1 to ¬
             "http://bugzilla.mozilla.org/"
        end tell
        click button 1
     end tell
     delay 5
     ..
      .



        The main difference with the ANDROID script shown in Example 3.2 is that
     APPLESCRIPT no longer references user controls by position but by names such as
     Open Web Location and relative numbers such as menu bar 1. This makes the
     script much more robust against size or position changes (only the labels and the
     relative ordering of the user interface controls must remain constant).
        Again, such scripts can also be recorded from user interactions. Several capture/
     replay tools are available that work at the level of named user controls. However,
     even if we raise the abstraction level to user controls scripts remain fragile: Any
     single renaming or rearrangement of controls causes all scripts to become obsolete.

     3.3.4 Assessing Test Results
     Whether we are controlling the application using event streams or user controls,one
     major problem remains: Our simulation must still examine the program’s output.
     ■   Examining the output is necessary for synchronization, as the simulated user
         may have to wait until a speciﬁc action completes. In our MOZILLA script, we
         circumvented this problem by introducing appropriate delays.
                                            3.4 Testing at the Functionality Layer         57



■   Examining the program’s output is necessary for result assessment. Eventually,
    our test must determine whether the result matches the expectations or not.
    In our MOZILLA example, this was particularly easy. The crash of a program is
    relatively easy to detect, but if we had to verify MOZILLA’s output on the screen
    we would have a difﬁcult time processing and assessing this output.
   To sum up, the advantage of testing at the presentation layer is that it is always
feasible. We can always simulate and automate a user’s behavior. However, this is
already the only advantage. In general, one should use the presentation layer for
testing only:
    ■ If the problem occurs in the presentation
    ■ If the presentation layer is easily used by computers
    ■ If there is no other choice (for instance, because there is no clear separa-

      tion between presentation and functionality, or because the lower layers are
      inaccessible for testing)
    The rule of thumb is: The friendlier an interface is to humans, the less friendly it
is to computers. Therefore, we should have a look at alternative interfaces that are
better suited to automation.



3.4 TESTING AT THE FUNCTIONALITY LAYER
Rather than simulate user interaction, it is much preferable to have the program
provide an interface that is designed for automation—or, more generally, designed
for interaction with technical systems. Such an interface may be designed for inter-
action with programming languages (for instance, the programming language the
application itself is written in). However, some programs provide interfacing with
scripting language, allowing even end users and nonprogrammers to automate
execution in a simple way.
    Example 3.5 shows an APPLESCRIPT program that uses the scripting capabilities
of the Safari Web browser to load a given Web page and to print it, mimicking our
MOZILLA example. This script uses commands such as
    set the URL of the front document

that work regardless of what the user interface looks like, and thus make the script
unaffected by any changes of the user interface. Note, though, that not every Safari
feature is scriptable. To print a page (step 2 in Example 3.5), we still have to fall
back to the presentation layer.
    Support for automation at the functionality layer greatly differs by operating
environment. In Mac OS, APPLESCRIPT is available for several applications. In Win-
dows,this role is ﬁlled byVisual Basic.Example 3.6 shows aVBSCRIPT program that
loads a ﬁle into Internet Explorer (IE; note how this program waits until the page is
actually loaded). Under Linux and UNIX,there is no single standard for scripting—no
scripting support for MOZILLA, for instance.
58   CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail



     EXAMPLE 3.5: Loading a site in Safari using APPLESCRIPT. This script uses
     Safari’s built-in functionality layer to open Web pages—except for printing,
     where one has to resort to simulating user interaction
     # 1. Load document
     tell application "Safari"
       activate
       if not (exists document 1)
         make new document at the beginning of documents
       end if
       set the URL of the front document ¬
         to "http://bugzilla.mozilla.org/"
       delay 5
     end tell

     # 2. Print it
     # No script support for printing, so we go via the GUI
     tell application "System Events"
       tell process "safari"
         keystroke "p" using command down
       end tell
     end tell




     EXAMPLE 3.6: Loading a site in Internet Explorer using VBSCRIPT. The script
     uses IE’s functionality layer to open pages
     ’ Load document
     Set IE = CreateObject("InternetExplorer.Application")
     IE.navigate "http://bugzilla.mozilla.org/"
     IE.visible=1

     ’ Wait until the page is loaded
     While IE.Busy
          WScript.Sleep 100
     Wend



         Nonetheless, the advent of Web components has encouraged further separation
     of functionality and presentation, thus making automation far easier for future
     applications. Every major scripting language (such as VBSCRIPT, PERL, PYTHON,
     and, APPLESCRIPT ) can use Web component interfaces such as SOAP to inter-
     act with local and distributed components and services. Essentially, arbitrary Web
     components can be accessed using arbitrary scripting languages.
         You may be tempted to deﬁne your own home-grown scripting language that
     is built into the application. In general, however, this is not worth the investment.
     Sooner or later you will require variables, control structures, and modularization—
     and it is difﬁcult to add these features one at a time. It is far easier to incorporate
                                                      3.5 Testing at the Unit Layer        59



an existing interpreter for a powerful scripting language such as PYTHON, PERL, or
TCL and extend it with application-speciﬁc commands. Even more easily, you can
turn your application into a .NET component, a JAVA bean, or a CORBA compo-
nent. All of this makes the functionality available for arbitrary automation purposes
and is thus great for automated testing. (Be aware, though, that automation inter-
faces can be exploited by malicious users. For instance, automation features in
Microsoft Ofﬁce have frequently been used to send document and email viruses
automatically.)
   Overall, the big advantage of testing at the functionality layers is that the results
can be easily accessed and evaluated—something that is difﬁcult to do at a pre-
sentation layer for humans. For Web components, results typically come in XML
format, which is easy to parse and process for all scripting languages. Thus, unless
one wants to test individual parts of the program, testing (and debugging) at the
functionality level is the way to go.
   Unfortunately, all of this requires a clear separation between presentation and
functionality. Especially older programs may come as monolithic entities without
presentation or functionality layers. In this case, you have three choices:
   ■ You can go through the presentation layer, as discussed in Section 3.3, and
     suffer all of the problems associated with assessing test results.
   ■ You can do a major redesign to separate presentation and functionality—or at

     least to reduce dependences between them. We will come back to this idea
     when discussing designing for debugging (Section 3.7).
   ■ You can decompose the program and access the individual units directly. (This

     is discussed in the next section.)



3.5 TESTING AT THE UNIT LAYER
Any nontrivial program can be decomposed into a number of individual units—that
is, subprograms, functions, libraries, modules, abstract data types, objects, classes,
packages, components, beans, or whatever decomposition the design and the
language provide. These units communicate via interfaces—just like the program
communicates with its environment.
    The idea now is not to automate the execution of the entire program but only
the execution of a speciﬁc unit. This has the advantage that automating the unit in
isolation is frequently easier than automating the entire program. The disadvantage,
of course, is that you can only automate the behavior of the given unit and thus
must count on the unit producing the problem in isolation.
     Units are typically not accessible to end users, and thus not necessarily acces-
sible for scripting, as discussed in Section 3.4. However, they are accessible to
programmers, using the same means as the enclosing program to access their
services—typically, simple invocation of functions and methods in the language
of the program.
60   CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail



        Whereas units are among the eldest concepts of programming, the concept of
     automated testing at the unit level has seen a burst of interest only in the last few
     years. This is due to the big interest in extreme programming, which mandates
     automated tests as early and often as possible (and notably the creation of a unit
     test case before implementation),and to the fact that massive automated testing has
     become much more affordable than, say, 20 years ago.
        All of these tools provide a testing framework that collects a number of indi-
     vidual unit tests—a test that covers a single unit. Unit tests are supposed to run
     automatically—that is, without any user interaction. On request, the testing frame-
     work runs some or all unit tests and displays a summary of the executed unit tests
     and their respective outcomes.When a single unit test executes,a testing framework
     does three things:

     1. It sets up an environment for embedding the unit. Frequently, a unit will
        require services of other units or the operating environment.This part sets up the
        stage.
     2. It tests the unit. Each possible behavior of the unit is covered by a test case,
        which ﬁrst performs the operation(s) and then veriﬁes whether the outcome is
        as expected.
     3. It tears down the environment again.This means it brings everything back in the
        state encountered initially.

         Consider an example of how to use unit tests. Assume that as part of a Web
     browser you manage a JAVA class for uniform resource locators (URLS) such as the
     following.
        http://www.askigor.org/status.php?id=sample#top

     A URL class has a constructor that takes a URL as a string. Among others, it provides
     methods for retrieving the protocol (e.g., http), the host (e.g., www.askigor.org),
     the path (e.g., /status.php), and the query (e.g., id=sample).
         Suppose you want to test these methods. Because you are working with a JAVA
     class, one of the ﬁrst choices for unit testing is the JUNIT testing framework. JUNIT
     provides all we want from a testing framework. It allows us to organize and con-
     duct automated tests in a simple yet effective fashion. (In fact, JUNIT has been
     so successful that its approach has been adopted for more than 100 languages,
     including CPPUNIT for C++, VBUNIT for VBSCRIPT, PYUNIT for PYTHON, and
     so on.)
        To test the URL class with JUNIT,you create a test case URLTest that is a subclass
     of TestCase. The source code URLTest.java is shown in Example 3.7. In this
     template, the setUp() method is responsible for setting up the environment for
     embedding the unit.The tearDown() method destroys the environment again. Our
     environment consists of a rational member variable askigor_url containing the
     URL. This variable can be used in all further tests.
                                                      3.5 Testing at the Unit Layer         61




EXAMPLE 3.7: URLTest.java—a unit test for URLS
import junit.framework.Test;
import junit.framework.TestCase;
import junit.framework.TestSuite;

public class URLTest extends TestCase {

     private URL askigor_url;

     // Create new test
     public URLTest(String name) {
         super(name);
     }

     // Assign a name to this test case
     public String toString() {
         return getName();
     }

     // Setup environment
     // will be called before any testXXX() method
     protected void setUp() {
         askigor_url = new URL("http://www.askigor.org/" +
                               "status.php?id=sample");
     }

     // Release environment
     protected void tearDown() {
         askigor_url = null;
     }


    We can add the individual tests to this class. In JUNIT, each test comes in a
separate method. We shall add four methods that test for equality and nonequality,
respectively, as shown in Example 3.8. The assertEquals() method makes the
test fail if the two arguments do not equal each other.
    We next need a suite that runs all tests, as shown in Example 3.9. By default, any
method of the test class with a name that begins with the word test will be run
as a test. For the last step, we have to give the class a main method that invokes a
GUI for testing. This piece of code is shown in Example 3.10. This concludes the
URLTest class.
    The main method we have added to the test case allows us to execute it as a
stand-alone application. If we do so, we obtain the graphical user interface shown
in Figure 3.3. Clicking on Run runs all tests at once.The bar below shows the status.
If the bar is green (as in the left window), all tests have been run successfully. If the
bar is red (as in the right window), some tests have failed.
    The important thing about unit tests is that they run automatically—that is,
we can assess the unit state with a click of a single button. Recent studies by
62   CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail



     EXAMPLE 3.8: Actual tests in URLTest.java
     // Test for protocol ("http", "ftp", etc.)
     public void testProtocol() {
         assertEquals(askigor_url.getProtocol(), "http");
     }

     // Test for host
     public void testHost() {
         int noPort = ---1;
         assertEquals(askigor_url.getHost(),
                      "www.askigor.org");
         assertEquals(askigor_url.getPort(), noPort);
     }

     // Test for path
     public void testPath() {
         assertEquals(askigor_url.getPath(), "/status.php");
     }

     // Test for query part
     public void testQuery() {
         assertEquals(askigor_url.getQuery(), "id=sample");
     }



     EXAMPLE 3.9: Setting up a test suite in URLTest.java
     // Set up a suite of tests
     public static TestSuite suite() {
         TestSuite suite =
             new TestSuite(URLTest.class);
         return suite;
     }



     EXAMPLE 3.10: A main method for URLTest.java
         // Main method: Invokes GUI
         public static void main(String args[]) {
             String[] testCaseName =
                 { URLTest.class.getName() };

              // Run using a textual user interface
              // junit.textui.TestRunner.main(testCaseName);

              // Run using a graphical user interface
              junit.swingui.TestRunner.main(testCaseName);
         }
     }
                                                                        3.6 Isolating Units    63




FIGURE 3.3
The JUNIT graphical user interface. The left dialog shows a passing test, the right dialog a
failing test—with a failure description in the bottom test ﬁeld.


Saff and Ernst (2004b) show that users write better code faster if the test runs
automatically each time they save the program (i.e., not even a button click is
needed). This idea of continuous testing suggests that you simply cannot test early
and often enough.



3.6 ISOLATING UNITS
Automated unit testing of low-level classes such as URL is particularly easy, because
such classes do not depend on anything. That is, we do not have to import and set
up an entire environment just to make the URL class run. In principle,we could also
unit test entire applications such as Mozilla—in a manner similar to testing at the
functionality layer (Section 3.4) but using an API rather than a scripting language.
   However, all of this automation again requires that the unit in question clearly
separate functionality and presentation, and make its results available for auto-
matic assessment. This is true for many programs, which thus make it possible for
functionality to be examined (and tested and debugged) in isolation.
64   CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail



         However, there are programs in which the functionality depends on the presen-
     tation, such that it is impossible to separate them. Example 3.11 shows an example.
     The function print_to_file() prints the current Web page to a ﬁle.To avoid over-
     writing an existing ﬁle, it asks the user for conﬁrmation if the ﬁle already exists.
     From the user’s perspective, such protection against data loss is a strict necessity.
     From the tester’s perspective, though, this conﬁrmation makes the functionality
     depend on the presentation. This introduces a circular dependence, as shown in
     Figure 3.4:
         ■ The presentation invokes print_to_file(), thus depending on the func-
           tionality.
         ■ The functionality invokes confirm_loss(), thus depending on the presen-

           tation.



     EXAMPLE 3.11: Functionality depending on presentation
     // Print current Web page to FILENAME.
     void print_to_file(string filename)
     {
         if (path_exists(filename))
         {
             // FILENAME exists;
             // ask user to confirm overwrite
             bool confirmed = confirm_loss(filename);
             if (!confirmed)
                 return;
         }

             // Proceed printing to FILENAME
             ...
     }




                                           invokes



                           Core                          UserPresentation

                     +print_to_file()                   +confirm_loss()

                                           invokes

     FIGURE 3.4
     A circular dependence. The Core and UserPresentation classes depend on each other
     and thus cannot be tested (or debugged) separately.
                                                              3.6 Isolating Units      65




EXAMPLE 3.12: Functionality with parameterized presentation
// Print current Web page to FILENAME.
void print_to_file(string filename,
                  Presentation *presentation)
{
    if (path_exists(filename))
    {
        // FILENAME exists; confirm overwrite
        bool confirmed =
            presentation->confirm_loss(filename);
        if (!confirmed)
            return;
    }

    // Proceed printing to FILENAME
    ...
}



    As a result, presentation and functionality can no longer be separated from each
other. This has a bad impact on testing (and debugging),as we can no longer interact
at the functionality layer alone. If a testing program invokes print_to_file(),
setting up confirm_loss() to reply automatically will result in a major hassle. The
question is thus: How do we break dependences that keep us from isolating units?
    In the case of confirm_loss(), we could easily hack it such that the function
runs in two modes: the “automated” mode disables conﬁrmation, always returning
true; the “interactive” mode enables conﬁrmation, querying the user. A much more
general solution,though,would be to parameterize the print_to_file() function
such that it could work with arbitrary presentations.
   This variant of the print_to_file() function is shown in Example 3.12. The
idea here is to have a Presentation class that, among others, again includes
the confirm_loss() method. However, Presentation need not necessarily be
a presentation for the user. Instead, as shown in Figure 3.5, Presentation is an
interface—an abstract superclass that is instantiated only in subclasses. One of
these subclasses (e.g., UserPresentation) may be geared toward the user and
implement all user interaction. Another subclass (e.g., AutomatedPresentation)
may be geared toward automation, though, and always return true whenever
confirm_loss() is invoked.
    What do we get by adopting the inheritance scheme shown in Figure 3.5? We
have effectively broken the dependence between functionality and presentation—
that is, the presentation that is geared toward the user. For testing purposes, we
must still provide some functionality we depend on, but this can be encapsulated
in a small class such as AutomatedPresentation.
    Overall, the general principle of breaking a dependence is known as the
dependence inversion principle, which can be summarized as depending on
66   CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail



                  Core                             Presentation

         +print_to_file( )                      +confirm_loss( )




                         UserPresentation                     AutomatedPresentation

                         +confirm_loss( )                         +confirm_loss( )


                                            ask user                            return true;


     FIGURE 3.5
     Depending on abstractions rather than details. Presentation is now an abstract superclass,
     which can be instantiated either as UserPresentation (with conﬁrmation) or as
     AutomatedPresentation (without conﬁrmation). The circular dependency between
     core and presentation is broken.


     abstractions rather than details. Whenever you have some component A depend-
     ing on some component B,and you want to break this dependence,you perform the
     following:
        1. Introduce an abstract superclass B , and make B a subclass of B .
        2. Set up A such that it depends on the abstract B rather than on the concrete B.
        3. Introduce alternate subclasses of B that can be used with A such that B is no
           longer required.
         By having A depend on the abstract B rather than on the concrete B, we can set
     up arbitrary new subclasses of B without ever having to change A—and we have
     effectively broken the dependence between A and B.



     3.7 DESIGNING FOR DEBUGGING
     The principle of reducing dependences by depending on abstractions rather than
     on details goes a long way. In fact, entire application frameworks can be built
     this way. Among the most popular examples is the model-view-controller archi-
     tectural pattern, which decouples functionality and presentation at the application
     level.
        To illustrate the model-view-controller pattern, let’s imagine we want to build an
     information system for election day. As illustrated in Figure 3.6, we want to display
     the election data in a number of graphical formats, including pie and bar charts. We
                                                          3.7 Designing for Debugging           67




                                           48%
                                           28%
                                           10%
                                            6%
                                            4%
                                            4%




                                                                        48
                                                                        28
                                                                        10
                                                                         6
                                                                         4
                                                                         4               User



FIGURE 3.6
An information system for election day. The actual data (on top) is displayed in a number of
graphical formats, and also manipulated as text.


also want to display the data in the form of a spreadsheet, whereby an operator can
manipulate and enter the data.
    How would one build such a system? The key idea here is again to separate
functionality and presentations. In no way do we want the core functionality being
dependent on a speciﬁc view. The model-view-controller pattern, as illustrated in
Figure 3.7, gives us a general solution to this problem. It splits responsibilities into
two parts:
   1. A model that holds the core data and provides services that operate on this
      core data.
   2. A number of observers that register or attach to the model and get notiﬁed
      whenever the core data changes.
Observers, again, are divided into two subclasses.
   1. A view is responsible for displaying the core data in a speciﬁc way (such as pie
      chart views or bar chart views).
   2. A controller handles input events (typically from the user) and invokes
      the services of the model.
   When a user thus interacts with a controller, he or she will eventually invoke
a service that changes the core data. When this happens, all views attached to the
model are automatically notiﬁed—that is, they can get the data from the model in
68   CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail



                             Model

                  -coreData
                                                     Register observers
                  + attach(Observer)
                  + detach(Observer)
                  + notify( )
                  + getData( )                       Notify observers
                  + service( )
                                1

                                 Observers



                                        0..*
                                         Observer              Update view

                                        +update()




                      View
                                                                        Controller
         + initialize(Model)            1       0. .1
         + makeController( )                            + initialize(Model,View)
         + activate( )                                  + handleEvent( )
         + display( )                                   + update( )
         + update( )


     FIGURE 3.7
     The model-view-controller pattern. A model has a number of observers, which can be either
     views or controllers.

     order to update their displays. This also includes the view of the user, who thus gets
     visual feedback.
         When it comes to testing and debugging, a model-view-controller architecture
     has several beneﬁts. For testing, one can build and add new controllers that invoke
     services of the model—for instance, controllers that automate execution of these
     services. For debugging, one can register special views that automatically log all
     changes to the model. Finally,every observer and model can be examined and tested
     in isolation, thus reducing complexity.
         As the model-view-controller pattern shows, it is generally advisable to avoid
     dependences between presentation and functionality. However, any dependence
     may eventually cause problems in testing and debugging. Just as we want to examine
                                             3.8 Preventing Unknown Problems             69



systems that are isolated in our controlled environment (rather than embedded in
the user’s environment), we want to examine units that are isolated in a controlled
environment rather than entangled with the entire system. Isolated units are not
only easier to test and debug but easier to understand,reuse,and maintain. Reducing
dependences is thus a key issue in software design. Fortunately, all software design
methods attempt to minimize dependences between units, using the same two
principles:
High cohesion. This is the basic principle that tells what to group into a unit.
 Those parts of a system that operate on common data (and thus depend on
 these data) should be grouped together—typically,into some unit as supported by
 the design or programming language. For instance, object-oriented design groups
 the state (i.e., data) and the functions that work on these data into classes and
 objects.
Low coupling. This is the principle that reduces dependences. If two units do
  not operate on common data, they should exchange as little information as pos-
  sible. This principle is also known as information hiding, and is the key for
  understandable, reusable, and extensible systems. The principle of low coupling
  also prohibits circular dependences, as they couple all involved units.
    Applying the principles of strong cohesion and low coupling consistently will
reduce the number of dependences in any design.Thus,the confirm_loss() invo-
cation (Example 3.11) would be counterintuitive as it violates the principle of low
coupling by coupling presentation and functionality more than necessary.
    Given the time potentially saved on coding, testing, and debugging, any extra
hour spent on improving the design is a good investment. A good design will not
only make your system more ﬂexible,more robust,and more reusable,but will make
it easier to test and to debug. If you want to know more about design, the “Further
Reading” section gives a number of useful references.




3.8 PREVENTING UNKNOWN PROBLEMS
So far, this section has been about setting up tests for debugging—that is, how to
isolate a unit in a controlled environment. All of this assumes that a problem has
already occurred.
    Any problem that escapes into the wild (and is experienced by a user) indicates
that the product has not been tested (or reviewed or proven) well enough. Con-
sequently, the quality-assurance process must be reﬁned such that the problem in
question (and hopefully similar problems) will not occur in the future.
    As this is a book about debugging (i.e., the cure of known problems), we cannot
spend too much space on preventing yet unknown problems. This is not to negate
that prevention is better than cure. In fact, one might say that, by far, most of com-
puter science is concerned with preventing problems. But when prevention fails,
  70     CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail



          LIST 3.1: Essential Rules for Testing
          Specify. A program cannot be correct on its own—it can only be correct with respect to some
             speciﬁcation that describes its purpose. Attempt precise, or even formal, speciﬁcations
             that cover the entire behavior, including exceptions. A full speciﬁcation will be a big help in
             understanding how the system is supposed to work, and thus help you in writing a correct
             system.
          Test early. This principle states that you must not wait with testing until the entire system is
              assembled. Instead, run test cases as soon as a unit is implemented, and assemble your
              system out of carefully tested units.
          Test ﬁrst. Write test cases before implementing the unit. This is useful because test cases can
              serve as speciﬁcations. Although test cases specify only examples, a sufﬁcient number of
              test cases can make it difﬁcult to implement something else than the most elegant (and
              correct) solution.
          Test often. At the minimum, run your tests with each release of the system. Better yet, run
              your tests with every change. The sooner you know that there is a defect, the smaller the
              set of accumulated changes that might have caused the defect. Automation helps a lot
              here.
          Test enough. Measure the coverage of your tests. How many statements and branches are
              actually taken? Instrument your code to gather coverage and design your test cases
              to achieve sufﬁcient coverage. Use random inputs to cover exceptional and extreme
              situations.
          Have others test. Testing for unknown problems is a destructive process. By all means, one
             must try to uncover a weakness in the program. As people in general prefer being construc-
             tive to ripping things apart, this is a difﬁcult psychological situation for most. In particular,
             it makes an author unsuited to test his or her own code. Therefore, always have someone
             independent test your program, and be open to criticism.


          there is need for a cure, and that is what this book is about. Nonetheless, for your
          reference, Lists 3.1 and 3.2 capture basic rules of testing and quality assurance.
              Quality assurance can never reach perfection. Even if all techniques are applied
          to the extreme, we will still have programs with surprising behavior. However, as
          a professional developer, you should know about all of these techniques, and be
          prepared to suggest them whenever it comes to reducing risk. Making mistakes is
          hard to avoid but not caring to prevent mistakes is unacceptable.



          3.9 CONCEPTS
How To To test for debugging, one must:
           ■ Create a test to reproduce the problem
           ■ Run the test several times during debugging
           ■ Run the test before new releases to prevent regression
                                                                                3.9 Concepts          71



LIST 3.2: More Tools and Techniques for Quality Assurance
Have others review. Testing is not the most effective way to catch defects. Reviewing is. No
   other technique catches so many defects for the same amount of effort. Have someone
   else review your code and check for possible defects. Think about pair programming as
   a means of increasing the amount of reviews.
Check the code. More and more, computers can detect errors and anomalies in your system.
   Chapters 7 and 11 give an overview. Running such tools on your code comes at a small
   cost, but brings greater and greater beneﬁts as computers get faster and faster.
Verify. Several important properties of software systems can today be shown automatically
    or semiautomatically. If the behavior of your system can be modeled as a ﬁnite-state
    machine, software model checking comes in handy to prove correctness. That is how
    Microsoft validates its device drivers.
Assert. If you cannot fully prove correctness, go the simpler way: Let the computer do the
   work and have it check its state at runtime (see Chapter 10). Your program may still fail
   due to a failed assertion, but if all assertions are met the result will be correct with respect
   to all assertions.



Due to the number of tests needed in debugging, it is thus useful to automate as
    much as possible.
To automate program execution, one can access three layers.
    ■ Presentation layer
    ■ Functionality layer
    ■ Unit layer

The layers differ in ease of execution, ease of interaction, ease of result assessment,
    and robustness against changes.
To test at the presentation layer, the testing environment must stimulate human
    activities—either input devices (low level) or user controls (higher level).
To test at the functionality layer, use an interface designed for automation—
    typically using speciﬁc scripting languages.
To test at the unit layer, use the API of a program unit to control it and to assess
    its results.
To isolate a unit, break dependences using the dependence inversion principle,
    making the unit depend on abstractions rather than on details.
To design for debugging, reduce the amount of dependences using the principles
   of high cohesion and low coupling.
Design patterns such as model-view-controller are useful for reducing dependences.
To prevent unknown problems, one can use a variety of techniques, including the
   following:
   ■ Testing early, testing often, and testing enough
   ■ Reviewing by others and pair programming
72   CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail



        ■   Having the computer check the code for anomalies and common errors
        ■   Proving correctness formally (using computer support)




     3.10 TOOLS
     JUNIT. JUNIT as well as unit test tools for other languages can be obtained via its
       Web page at http://www.junit.org/.
     ANDROID. All scripting languages described in the chapter are also documented
       online.The ANDROID package,unfortunately,is no longer available for download;
       an Internet search may help you out.
     APPLESCRIPT. APPLESCRIPT documentation and examples are found at http://
       www.apple.com/applescript/. Neuburg (2003) is strongly recommended as a
       guide to APPLESCRIPT.
     VBSCRIPT. VBSCRIPT and other Microsoft tools for scripting can be found via
       http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VBScript.
     Other Scripting Languages. Other scripting languages suitable for test automa-
       tion include PYTHON, PERL,TCL, and JAVASCRIPT, all of which are documented
       by a great deal of information available on the Web.
     FAUMachine. The virtual machines discussed in this chapter are also publicly avail-
       able. The FAUMachine is a virtual machine speciﬁcally built for testing purposes.
       Among others, the FAUMachine allows you to control the entire virtual machine
       via scripts. FAUMachine can be researched at http://www.faumachine.org/.
     VMWare. At the time of this writing, VMWare was one of the most popular
       providers of virtual machines. It can be found at http://www.vmware.com/.
     Virtual PC. Microsoft also offers Microsoft Virtual PC for various operating
       systems, found at http://www.microsoft.com/virtualpc/.




     3.11 FURTHER READING
     Testing
     The book by Myers (1979) has been the classic text on testing for 30 years. It is
     still up-to-date, and I recommend it as a ﬁrst read to anyone who is interested in
     testing. It also includes a chapter on testing for debugging. If you prefer a hands-on
     approach, try Kaner et al. (1999).
         The book by Pezzè and Young (2005) is an in-depth treatment of all things testing
     and analysis. Psychological issues, in particular the law that developers are unsuited
     to testing their own code, are addressed in Weinberg (1971).
                                                           3.11 Further Reading        73



Automation
Fewster and Graham (1998) and Dustin et al. (2001) focus on automated testing,
focusing especially on the management view—such as when and how we should
automate which parts of our test suite. A more technical view on automated testing
can be found on the Web sites devoted to extreme programming and unit testing, in
particular http://www.junit.org/ for JUNIT and http://www.xprogramming.com/
for extreme programming.

Design
If you do not have it already, Design Patterns by Gamma et al. (1994) contains
much wisdom regarding how to structure systems. On the architectural level, the
Pattern-Oriented Software Architecture Series by Buschmann et al. (1996) and
Schmidt et al. (2000) contains several useful patterns. The model-view-controller
example is taken from this series.
    The classic all-in-one textbook on object-oriented software design is the book
by Meyer (1997). Other classic design books include those by Booch (1994) and
Larman (2002). The dependence inversion principle was coined by Martin (1996).
The article is available online at http://www.objectmentor.com/.



EXERCISES
3.1 In a few words, describe testing for debugging and for validation. Discuss the
    differences between these purposes.
3.2 Discuss the differences between testing at presentation,functionality,and unit
    layer. Focus on ease of execution,ease of interaction,ease of result assessment,
    and robustness against changes.
3.3 Is testing at the presentation layer of a command-line tool the same as functio-
    nality testing? Discuss similarities and differences.
3.4   Use your favorite Web browser and try to automate the loading of a Web page,
      interacting at the presentation or the functionality layer.
3.5 Run the URLtest.java JUNIT test (Example 3.7). You need a URL class for
    testing. You can use the URL class that is part of the JAVA 1.4 java.net.URL
    package,documented at http://java.sun.com/. Simply include import java.
    net.URL in URLTest.java and you can start running JUNIT.

3.6   Extend URLTest.java to include tests for other methods of the URL class. Is
      the documentation precise enough to let you write test cases?
3.7   In the model-view-controller pattern (Figure 3.7),every observer still depends
      on a given model. How can you use the dependence inversion principle to
      break this dependence?
74   CHAPTER 3 Making Programs Fail



     3.8 When it comes to breaking dependences, there are alternatives to introducing
         abstract classes. Sketch and discuss
         (a) The usage of macros (C, C++ )
         (b) The usage of aspects (see Section 8.2.3 in Chapter 8)
          to break the dependence illustrated in Example 3.11.
     3.9 JUNIT works ﬁne to discover defects at the unit level, but fails if a failure is
         caused by multiple units. Discuss.




      Software features that can’t be demonstrated by automated tests
      simply don’t exist.
                                                                        – KENT BECK
                                              Extreme Programming Explained (2000)
                                                                         CHAPTER


Reproducing Problems
                                                                            4
The ﬁrst step in debugging is to reproduce the problem in question—that is, to
create a test case that causes the program to fail in the speciﬁed way. The ﬁrst reason
is to bring it under control, such that it can be observed. The second reason is to
verify the success of the ﬁx.This chapter discusses typical strategies for reproducing
the operating environment, the history, and the problem symptoms.


4.1 THE FIRST TASK IN DEBUGGING
Once a problem report is in the problem database, or once a test has failed, the
problem will eventually be processed by some programmer in order to ﬁx it. The
programmer’s ﬁrst task (or, more precisely, the ﬁrst task of any debugging activity)
is to reproduce the problem—that is, the problem must occur in the very same way
as stated in the original problem report. Reproducing the problem is important for
two reasons:
1. To observe the problem. If you are not able to reproduce the problem,you cannot
   observe what is going on. This thoroughly limits your ability to reason about the
   program, as pointed out in Chapter 6. Basically, your only chance is to deduce
   from the program code what might have happened to cause the problem.
2. To check whether the problem is ﬁxed. You may be able to deduce a potential
   problem cause—and even to design a change that would ﬁx this potential cause.
   But how do you show that your change actually ﬁxes the problem in question?
   You can do so only by reproducing the initial scenario with the changed product,
   and showing that the problem now no longer occurs. Without reproducing the
   problem, you can never know that the problem has been ﬁxed.
    Of course, if the problem occurred in a test in the local environment we are
already set and done, because we can reproduce the test at the touch of a button—
assuming the test was automated and deterministic. In other cases, and if the
problem was reported by a user, we must ﬁrst create a test case that reproduces
the problem. This is the key issue in this chapter:

  HOW CAN A TEST REPRODUCE A SPECIFIC PROBLEM?
                                                                                          75
76   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems




     4.2 REPRODUCING THE PROBLEM ENVIRONMENT
     Whereas creating test cases per se is well understood (see Chapter 3), reproducing
     a speciﬁc problem can be one of the toughest problems in debugging. The process
     consists of two main steps:
         1. Reproducing the problem environment—that is, the setting in which the
            problem occurs.
         2. Reproducing the problem history—the steps necessary to create the
            problem.
        We ﬁrst focus on reproducing the problem environment. If a problem occurs
     in a speciﬁc environment, the best place to study the problem is exactly this envi-
     ronment. Thus, if Olaf has trouble with the Perfect Publishing Program we should
     simply knock on Olaf’s door and ask him whether we could take a brief look at his
     machine—or in a more tech-savvy environment ask him for permission to log on to
     his machine.
        Working in the problem environment offers the best chance of reproducing
     the problem. However, for numerous reasons working in the problem environment
     typically does not happen:
     ■   Privacy: The most important reason is privacy—users may simply not wish
         others to operate their machines; the same goes for large corporations.
     ■   Ease of development: To examine the problem, programmers may require
         a complete development environment, involving diagnostic software such as
         debuggers, which are not typically found on customer’s machines.
     ■   Cost of maintenance: Users may depend on their machines being operational.
         In many cases, you cannot simply take a machine out of production to maintain
         the software.
     ■   Travel cost: When physical access is required, having maintainers move to the
         user’s environment is expensive.
     ■   Risk of experiments: Debugging typically involves experiments, and running
         experiments on a user’s machine may cause damage.

        Thus, unless the problem environment is already prepared for diagnostic actions
     your local environment involves the least cost in reproducing the problem. For
     these reasons,as a maintainer you typically attempt to reproduce the problem using
     as much of the local environment as possible. This is an iterative process, as follows:
     1. Attempt to reproduce the problem in your environment, using the product
        release as speciﬁed in the problem report (see Section 2.2 in Chapter 2). If
        the problem occurs, you are done—and you are lucky.
            However, do not cry “success” simply because you experience a problem—
        cry “success” only if you experience the problem. Here, “the” problem means
        the problem exactly as speciﬁed in the problem report. Every deviation from
                                   4.2 Reproducing the Problem Environment              77



   the speciﬁed symptoms increases the risk of you working on a problem that is
   different from the user’s problem. Thus, be sure to check every single symptom
   that is speciﬁed. If it does not occur in your environment,you may want to reﬁne
   your efforts.
2. If the problem does not occur yet, adopt more and more circumstances from the
   problem environment—one after the other. This applies to conﬁguration ﬁles,
   drivers, hardware, or anything else that might possibly inﬂuence the execution
   of the product. Start with those circumstances
   ■ that are the most likely to cause problems (as inferred from previous problem

      reports), and
   ■ that are easy to change (and to be undone).

       For instance, if the problem environment includes a speciﬁc set of user
   preferences ﬁrst try using this set of preferences. If, however, the problem envi-
   ronment uses LemonyOS 1.0, but you use LemonyOS 1.1, you may want to
   downgrade your machine to LemonyOS 1.0 only after adopting all less-expensive
   aspects—or better yet have quality assurance keep a LemonyOS 1.0 machine for
   testing.
3. Adopt one circumstance after the other until
   ■ you could reproduce the problem, or
   ■ your environment is identical to the problem environment (as far as speciﬁed

      by the user).
       In the latter case, there are two alternatives:
   ■ The ﬁrst alternative is that because the problem does not occur in your envi-

      ronment it cannot have occurred in the problem environment. Consider the
      fact that the problem report is incomplete or wrong.
   ■ The second alternative is that the problem report is accurate but there still

      is a difference between your environment and the problem environment—
      because otherwise the problem would occur in your environment as well.
      Try to ﬁnd that difference by querying further facts about the problem
      environment.
   In both cases,it is wise to query further facts about the problem environment. As
   illustrated in Bug Story 4,even otherwise insigniﬁcant details can have an impact
   on whether one can reproduce earlier runs.
   This process of getting nearer and nearer to the problem environment has a
beneﬁcial side effect: you also isolate some circumstances that are relevant in pro-
ducing the problem. Let’s say the problem environment includes a Helquist graphics
card. Your environment does not yet include a Helquist graphics card and the prob-
lem does not occur. However, as soon as you add a Helquist graphics card the
problem does occur. This means that the Helquist graphics card is relevant for
reproducing the problem; more precisely, the Helquist graphics card is a problem
cause.Chapter 13 discusses systematic ways of isolating such causes—manually and
automatically.
78   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems




         BUG STORY 4
         Mad Laptop
         In 2002, I went to a conference to give a laptop demonstration of a complex soft-
         ware system. Before I left, we had taken every precaution that the software would
         run perfectly. But the evening before the demonstration, I sat in my hotel room and
         nothing worked. The software would run into time-out errors anytime, everywhere.
         I phoned my department at home. They had the same software on the same machine
         and everything worked.
            After three hours of trials, I decided to start from scratch. To my amazement, the
         demo now ran just ﬁne. What had happened? Within these three hours, the battery
         had run out of power and I had connected my laptop to a power plug. I disconnected
         the laptop, repeated the demo, and the problem occurred again. It turned out that my
         laptop ran slower when running on batteries, which saved energy but also introduced
         the time-out errors. Needless to say, all of our previous tests had been conducted on
         AC power, and this was how I gave the demo.




     4.3 REPRODUCING PROGRAM EXECUTION
     Finding an environment in which the problem occurs is not enough. We must also
     be able to recreate the individual steps that lead to the problem. Let’s assume that
     we have recreated the problem environment, as discussed in Section 4.2. Let’s also
     assume that the problem history, as stated in the problem report (see Section 2.2
     in Chapter 2), is accurate and complete. Still, we may not be able to reproduce the
     problem. In fact,even the user on the original machine may not be able to reproduce
     the problem.
         Why is it that for the same program a problem may or may not occur? The
     execution of a program is determined by its code (which we assume constant) and
     its input. If the input differs, so does the execution of the program. To reproduce a
     speciﬁc execution, we must thus reproduce the program input.
         To reproduce an input, the programmer must observe it and control it. Only
     when the input is under control does the execution become deterministic—that
     is, the outcome of the execution does not change when repeated. Without such
     control, the execution becomes nondeterministic—that is, the problem may occur
     or not, regardless of the will of the programmer.
         All of this sounds rather trivial when thinking of the program input in a classical
     sense—that is, data read from a ﬁle or a keyboard. Unfortunately, the input of a
     program can be more than that—in particular, if you take the view that the input
     comprises anything that inﬂuences the execution.The following are possible inputs,
     as sketched in Figure 4.1:
     ■    Data: As stored in ﬁles and databases is the least problematic input, as it can
          easily be reproduced.
                                              4.3 Reproducing Program Execution       79



                              Network       Static      User
                               input         data    interaction
               Operating
             environment                                            Time




               Schedules                                           Randomness


                 Physics                                           Debugging
                                                                   tools

FIGURE 4.1
Input that might inﬂuence a program’s execution.


■   User inputs: Can differ in minor details, which may be relevant for a problem.
■   Communications: Between threads, processes, or machines, offer several chal-
    lenges for reproduction.
■   Time: Can inﬂuence the program execution in various ways.
■   Random numbers: By deﬁnition make every program execution different.
■   Operating environments: Provide services beyond those listed previously that
    can heavily interact with the program, all of which may or may not inﬂuence the
    execution.
■   Process and thread schedules:Normally should not interfere with the program’s
    execution. However, if the program has a defect they may.
    Most of these inputs have intended effects on the program (which is why they
should be reproduced). Other inputs, though, have unintended effects, such as the
following inputs:
■   Physics: Is typically abstracted away at the hardware layer, but cosmic rays,
    electrical discharges, or quantum effects can inﬂuence a program’s execution.
■   Debugging tools: Typically interfere with the program execution, and thus may
    uncover but also mask problems.
   The general pattern for controlling these inputs is to set up a control layer
between the real input and the input as perceived by the program, as sketched
in Figure 4.2. This control layer isolates the program under observation from its
environment. The program input becomes controllable, and thus the execution
becomes deterministic. Any of the automated techniques discussed in Chapter 3
can be used for actually controlling the program.
    In the remainder of this chapter, we will focus on applying this pattern to
make a run deterministic, organized by input source. In Section 4.2, we have
already discussed how to reproduce the environment. Start with your own envi-
ronment and reproduce one input source after the other until the problem is
80   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems



                                              Input sources




     FIGURE 4.2
     Controlling a program’s input. To control program input, one sets up a control layer between
     the real input and the input as perceived by the program.


     reproduced. In the process, you will narrow down the input sources relevant to the
     problem.


     4.3.1 Reproducing Data
     Regarding reproduction,data as stored in ﬁles and/or databases are seldom an issue.
     Files and databases can easily be transferred from one machine to another, and can
     be easily replicated. The following are the only three issues to be aware of:
     1. Get all the data you need. Be sure to reproduce all data your application
        accesses and all data under the user’s control. This also includes conﬁguration
        data such as registries or conﬁguration ﬁles.
            Most of the data required to reproduce the problem is typically already
        included in the problem report. As discussed in Section 2.2 in Chapter 2, on
        reporting problems,it is helpful to set up a speciﬁc tool or functionality to collect
        such data.
     2. Get only the data you need. Some programs operate on enormous amounts of
        data, which makes it difﬁcult to examine the problem. Chapter 5 discusses how
        to simplify input data.
     3. Take care of privacy issues. Data under the user’s control may contain private
        or conﬁdential information. Be sure not to ﬁnd entire hard disks with sensitive
        information in your mailbox (this has happened!).


     4.3.2 Reproducing User Interaction
     In the good old days, programs would read their input from data ﬁles only, making
     reproduction an easy task. Modern programs, though, use complex user interfaces,
     and these make it difﬁcult to observe and control the user’s input.
        The standard approach to reproducing user interaction is to use a capture/replay
     tool. Such a tool comes in two modes (Figure 4.3):
                                               4.3 Reproducing Program Execution             81



                         Input sources




                     Recording Input (a)                  Relaying Input (b)

FIGURE 4.3
Capturing and replaying program input. During a normal execution, the controlling layer
records the interaction (a). Later, it replays it (b).

1. Capturing interaction. The program executes normally, interacting with its
   environment. However, the tool records all input from the environment to a
   script before forwarding it to the program.
2. Replaying interaction. The program executes under control of the tool. The
   tool redirects the program input such that it no longer gets its input from the
   environment but rather from the previously recorded script. Obviously, this
   makes the input controllable—and thus allows for reproducible runs.
   Technically, a tool realizes capture/replay by intercepting calls to library or sys-
tem functions providing input. Capture takes place after the execution of the
input function. The tool records the returned input and passes it on to the pro-
gram. During replay, the tool no longer executes the input function. Instead, it
returns the previously recorded input.
   What does the recorded information look like? In Chapter 3 we saw examples of
scripts that automate program interaction. Depending on the layer at which input
capturing occurs, the scripts simulate user input either
   ■ as a “low-level” stream of events (Section 3.3.1), or
   ■ as a “higher-level” sequence of interactions with user controls (Section 3.3.3).

   Capturing user interaction can also take place at the following two layers:
1. As a stream of events, a captured user interaction looks like the one shown
   in Example 3.4, except that there would be no comments and the script would
   include real-time aspects (such as waiting for,say,376 milliseconds until releasing
   a key).
2. As a sequence of interactions with user controls,a captured user interaction looks
   like that shown in Example 3.6,except that (again) there would be no comments.
   As discussed in Section 3.3, on testing at the presentation level, a script at the
“low level” is fragile. That is, the slightest change in user interface layout, font size,
or even interaction speed will make them unusable. Therefore, a low-level script
should not be used beyond a single short-term debugging session.
82   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems



         To make the test reusable,one should at least aim to automate input at the higher
     level—or test at the functionality layer, as described in Section 3.4. Alas, few tools
     are available that allow programmers to capture and replay interaction at these
     layers. For a single testing or debugging session, though, it may already sufﬁce to
     capture and replay just the basic user interaction in terms of key presses and mouse
     clicks.

     4.3.3 Reproducing Communications
     The techniques used for capturing and replaying user interaction (Section 4.3.2)
     can be extended to any type of communication. For instance, specialized tools can
     capture, inspect, reconstruct, and replay network trafﬁc.
         A general problem with such tools is that they may alter the performance of your
     program and its communications, especially if there are much data to be captured
     and replayed. (This is not the case with user interactions, which are typically low
     bandwidth.) The fact that tools alter the performance is not so much a problem
     in itself, but this change in the environment may mask problems that would occur
     otherwise (see Section 4.3.9 for the effects of debugging tools).
         Note that one does not necessarily have to capture the entire communication
     since the start of the program. If the program goes into a reproducible state while


       BUG STORY 5
       Press Play on Tape
       As a student, I worked in a computer store. This was in the mid-1980s, and we had
       HP calculators, Commodore PETs, and Ataris. One day, a customer walked in and asked
       for help. He was not able to enter a program on his Commodore 64 home computer.
       Whenever he entered the ﬁrst line, the computer would issue a syntax error message.
       We asked him to show us the problem on a C-64 nearby. He entered the ﬁrst line of the
       program and got the message:
           lO print "Hello World"
           ?syntax error
           ready.

          We were amazed, and tried to reproduce the problem. However, when one of us
       would enter the same line it would work properly. Only if the customer entered the
       line did the error occur. Finally,one of us asked the customer to enter just the number 10.
       He did so, and got:
           lO
           press play on tape
         Now we understood. We asked the customer, “How do you type ones and zeros?”
       He replied, “I use a lowercase l and a capital letter O, as on my old typewriter.”The
       customer had just entered lowercase l and capital O instead of ten, and the C-64 inter-
       preted this as an abbreviation for the LOAD command. “Oh, you mean I should use the
       digit keys instead?”“Yes,” we said, and off went another happy customer.
                                              4.3 Reproducing Program Execution             83



operating, it sufﬁces to capture (and replay) only the communication since that
reproducible state. Databases, for instance, reach such a reproducible state after
each transaction.
    Failure causes are likelier to be found in the later communications than in earlier
communications. Thus, it may frequently sufﬁce to capture just the latest communi-
cation (say, the database transactions that are not yet completed). This saves space,
does not hamper performance too much, and still may be helpful for reproducing
the problem.


4.3.4 Reproducing Time
Many programs require the current time of day for executing correctly. Problems
that depend on the time of day are difﬁcult to reproduce and difﬁcult to trace (see
Bug Story 6, for example).
   If the program is supposed to depend on the time of day, or if there is some
indication that the problem depends on the time of day,one must be able to execute
the program under an arbitrary time of day. One way to do so is to change the system
time before each execution—but this is cumbersome and error prone.A much more
comfortable option, though, is to make time a conﬁgurable item: the program is set
up such that it can be executed with an arbitrary time of day. This is useful for
reproducing problems and very helpful for creating automatic tests (Chapter 3).
   As in Section 4.3.2, on reproducing user input, the basic idea here is to obtain
control over input sources such that they can be reproduced at will. The time of
day is just a speciﬁc instance of how to obtain such control.


4.3.5 Reproducing Randomness
Speciﬁc programs, notably games and cryptographic applications, depend on ran-
domness. That is, they are supposed to behave differently in every single execution.
Here, nondeterminism is part of the design. That is, the program is set up in such a
way as to prohibit reproduction of individual runs.



  BUG STORY 6
  Program Only Works on Wednesday
  I once had a program that worked properly only on Wednesdays. The documentation
  claimed the day of the week was returned in a double word (8 bytes). In fact, Wednesday
  is nine characters long, and the system routine actually expected 12 bytes of space for
  the day of the week. Because I was supplying only 8 bytes, it was writing 4 bytes on
  top of the storage area intended for another purpose. As it turned out, that space was
  where a y was supposed to be stored for comparison with the user’s answer. Six days
  a week the system would wipe out the y with blanks, but on Wednesdays a y would be
  stored in its correct place.
  Source: Eisenstadt (1997).
84   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems



        When testing such applications, such randomness must also be controlled and
     made reproducible. The most efﬁcient way to do so depends on the source of
     randomness. If randomness is obtained from a series of pseudorandom numbers, it
     may sufﬁce to capture (and replay) the initial seed of the random number generator.
     Many games allow one to explicitly specify a seed such that individual executions
     can be reproduced.
        Cryptographic applications typically depend on more than just a pseudoran-
     dom number generator. They obtain randomness from several sources (such as user
     input, network events, thermal noise, or others). These sources must be captured
     and replayed like input, as discussed in Section 4.3.2. If needed, organize your
     program such that developers can replace the source of randomness by a deter-
     ministic source. (Be cautious about enabling end users to turn randomness off,
     though—especially in cryptographic applications!)


     4.3.6 Reproducing Operating Environments
     User interaction, communications, time, and randomness all have one thing in com-
     mon: a program interacts with its environment, using services provided by this
     environment. Such an operating environment typically consists of further libraries,
     maybe a virtual machine, an operating system, and eventually the entire world to
     which the particular machine may be connected.
         The entire interaction between a program and its environment is typically han-
     dled by the operating system. More precisely, the operating system controls all
     inputs and outputs of a program. Thus, the boundary between program and oper-
     ating system comes as a natural place at which to monitor, control, and possibly
     record and replay program executions.
         As an example, consider the simple C++ program shown in Example 4.1. When
     executed, it reads in a password from standard inputs and outputs “access granted”
     if the correct password is entered. (A real application would at least care not to
     echo the input.)
         What does the interaction between this program and its environment look like?
     On a Linux box, the STRACE tool monitors the interaction of a program with
     the operating system by printing out all system calls, their arguments, and their
     return values. (Similar tools are available on all UNIX-like systems.) After compil-
     ing password.C, we run STRACE on the resulting password binary, diverting the
     STRACE output into a ﬁle named LOG.
        $ c++ -o password password.C
        $ strace ./password 2> LOG
        Please enter your password: secret
        Access granted.
        $ _

        What does the STRACE output look like? Example 4.2 shows an excerpt from
     the LOG ﬁle. The LOG ﬁle lists the system calls—function invocations by which
                                          4.3 Reproducing Program Execution            85



EXAMPLE 4.1: password.C—a simple C++ password requester
#include <string>
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

string secret_password = "secret";

int main()
{
    string given_password;

    cout « "Please enter your password: ";
    cin » given_password;
    if (given_password == secret_password)
        cout « "Access granted." « endl;
    else
        cout « "Access denied." « endl;
}




EXAMPLE 4.2: The STRACE log from password.C (excerpt)
Clutter produced by shared libraries …
write(1, "Please enter your password: ", 28) = 28
read(0, "secret\n", 1024)                    = 7
write(1, "Access granted.\n", 16)            = 16
exit_group(0)                                = ?



the program requests services from the operating system. The write() system call,
for instance, writes a string to stream number 1, the standard output stream on
Linux (and other POSIX environments). STRACE also logs the data returned by the
system calls. For instance, it reports the return value of write() (the number of
written characters). For the following read() call, it reports the actual characters
("secret\n") read. Obviously, a tool such as STRACE is great for monitoring the
interaction between a program and its operating system.
    STRACE basically works by diverting the calls to the operating system to wrap-
per functions that log the incoming and outgoing data. There are various ways of
achieving this. For instance, STRACE could link the program with its own “faked”
versions of read(), write(), and so on that would all do the logging before and
after invoking the “real” read() and write() functions. STRACE goes a more gen-
eral way, which does not require relinking. On a Linux system, all system calls use
one single functionality—a speciﬁc interrupt routine that transfers control from
the program to the system kernel. STRACE diverts this interrupt routine to do the
logging.
86   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems



        The same mechanism that STRACE and like tools use for reporting the interaction
     can also be used for recording and replaying the interaction (actually, this is how
     recording and replaying input works). For instance, a log as generated by STRACE
     could be processed by a replay tool. Such a replay tool would no longer invoke the
     “real”functions but simply have its “fake”functions return the values as found in the
     STRACE log ﬁle.
         In Chapter 8 we learn more about obtaining such logs. In particular, aspect-
     oriented programming (see Section 8.2.3) offers elegant and system-independent
     ways of adding monitoring code to large sets of functions.
         However, the true technical problem is less the capturing (or even replaying)
     of logs than the sheer amount of data we have to cope with. As an example,
     consider a Web server that serves 10 requests per second. Say that each of these
     requests results in a trace log of about 10 kilobytes. Every hour will thus result
     in 10 ⫻ 3,600 ⫻ 10 KB ⫽ 360 MB of trace. A single day will result in 8,640 MB of
     trace. Given the advances in storage capacity, this may sound feasible. However,
     you should also consider that whenever you have to reproduce a problem you also
     have to replay all of this interaction.
        An alternative to tracing all of the interaction from scratch is to use checkpoints.
     A checkpoint basically records the entire state of a program such that it can be
     restored later. This is typically done when the program has reached some stable
     state. In the case of the Web server, for instance, this may be a pause between two
     requests or transactions.To reproduce a problem,it then sufﬁces to restore the latest
     checkpoint, and then to replay the interaction since that checkpoint.
        There is an obvious trade-off here. States are huge (see Figure 1.3, for instance)
     and capturing states into checkpoints may take time, and thus one must decide
     when to prefer checkpoints over recorded interaction. Chapter 14 discusses how
     to capture program states into checkpoints and how to restore them.


     4.3.7 Reproducing Schedules
     Modern programs typically consist of several concurrent threads or processes. In
     general, the schedule in which these individual parts are executed is deﬁned by the
     runtime or operating system, thus abstracting away details that would otherwise
     burden the programmer. Indeed, a program is supposed to behave identically, what-
     ever the schedule is. Consequently, although the schedule is nondeterministic the
     program execution should stay deterministic and the programmer need not care
     about parallelism and nondeterminism (if the program is correct, that is).
        Nondeterminism introduced by thread or process schedules is among the worst
     problems to face in debugging. The following is a simple example. The APACHE
     Web server provides a number of authentication mechanisms to make sure that
     only authorized clients can access speciﬁc Web pages. One of these authentication
     mechanisms is the htaccess mechanism. If a directory contains a .htaccess ﬁle,
     the access to this directory is restricted—typically to a set of users with passwords
     stored in a separate .htpasswd ﬁle.
                                               4.3 Reproducing Program Execution           87



  To maintain .htpasswd ﬁles, APACHE provides a helper program named
htpasswd. For instance, the invocation
   $ htpasswd .htpasswd jsmith
   New password: _
adds or modiﬁes the password for user jsmith. The htpasswd program prompts
the user for the password and stores the user name and the encrypted password in
the ﬁle .htpasswd.
    How can htpasswd ever be nondeterministic? The trouble occurs when mul-
tiple users (or processes or threads) are invoking htpasswd at the same time.
Normally, each invocation of htpasswd reads the .htpasswd ﬁle, modiﬁes it,
writes it, and closes it again. Multiple sequential invocations cause no problem, as
illustrated in Figure 4.4(a).
    However, if two htpasswd processes are running in parallel, bad things can
happen, as illustrated in Figure 4.4(b). Some htpasswd process A begins and opens
the .htpasswd ﬁle. Another process B does so at the same time and reads in the
content. Now, process A modiﬁes the content and writes back the .htpasswd ﬁle.
However, process B does so, too, effectively overwriting and undoing the changes
made by A.As long as write accesses to .htpasswd are scarce,it is unlikely that such
a schedule would ever occur,but if it does it will be difﬁcult to reproduce the failure.
    There are several solutions to the htpasswd problem (none of which the
htpasswd program implements at the time of this writing). The htpasswd could
lock the .htpasswd ﬁle and thus protect it against multiple concurrent updates. It
may also retrieve the last update time when reading the ﬁle, and check it again


 Schedule     Process A         Process B   Schedule     Process A          Process B
             open (“.htpasswd”)                        open (“.htpasswd”)
             read (...)                                               open (“.htpasswd”)
             modify (...)                                             read (...)
             write (...)                               read (...)
             close (...)                               modify (...)
                            open (“.htpasswd”)         write (...)
          Process                                      close (...)
                            read (...)
          Switch
                            modify (...)                              modify (...)
                            write (...)                               write (...)
                            close (...)                               close (...)
                                                    A’s updates
                                                    get lost!

                    Passing Schedule (a)                      Failing Schedule (b)

FIGURE 4.4
Differences in schedules may cause problems. If a process switch occurs in the middle of
processing a ﬁle the second process (b) may undo updates made by the ﬁrst process (a).
88   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems



     before writing. If the update time has changed in between, the ﬁle has changed and
     must be reread again.
          Similar problems (with similar solutions) exist for all resources shared across
     multiple threads or processes. If multiple threads all write into a shared variable,
     the thread that writes last wins. Again, the solution would be to introduce locks or
     language-speciﬁc synchronization mechanisms, as described in any good textbook
     on operating systems or parallel processes.
          However, all of these are solutions to a known problem, but to identify a prob-
     lem we must ﬁrst reproduce it. The general solution is to treat a schedule just like
     another input source, recording it and replaying it at will. However, as with commu-
     nications (see Section 4.3.3,on reproducing communication),the amount of data to
     collect can greatly affect the performance of a system. Another issue is scalability:
     recording and replaying the thread schedule of a single program has been shown
     to be practically feasible. However, recording and replaying an entire set of commu-
     nicating processes, including the schedules as imposed by the operating system, is
     still a challenge for today’s tools.
         As programs should behave identically under all possible thread and process
     schedules, one may attempt to uncover differences in execution as induced by
     schedule differences. Such differences may be uncovered by program analysis (see
     Chapter 7). For instance, one can verify that all access to shared variables happens
     in a synchronized fashion. Likewise, massive random testing (see Chapter 3) can
     uncover problems due to differing schedules.

     4.3.8 Physical Inﬂuences
     Nondeterminism, as induced by thread or process schedules, is just one of the
     aspects of the real world that programmers deliberately abstract away. Why do
     they abstract these aspects away? Because they are not supposed to inﬂuence the
     execution of the program.
         However, there are many ways to inﬂuence the machine on which our program
     executes. Energy impulses,for instance,can cause bits to ﬂip. Such energy impulses
     can come over power lines or network communications, but also from alpha par-
     ticles emitted from the Earth’s crust. (Cosmic rays, on the other side, have been
     shown to not inﬂuence programs in any way—except maybe in space-borne com-
     puters.) Quantum effects may also account for a certain amount of unpredictability.
     Real-life bugs can also cause failures (recall the tale of the moth caught in a relay, as
     told in Bug Story 1).
         Although computers are typically designed to withstand physical inﬂuence,there
     is a very small chance that such inﬂuences may actually cause the program to
     fail—and as they are extremely rare, physical inﬂuences are difﬁcult to reproduce.
     However, physical inﬂuences are also so rare that they can hardly be blamed for
     a nonreproducible problem. Yet it is common among programmers to blame, say,
     cosmic rays for an inexplicable problem, to shrug the shoulders, and go away.
         Professional programmers should take such physical inﬂuences into account
     only if all other alternatives have been proven to be irrelevant—and if the physical
                                           4.3 Reproducing Program Execution             89



inﬂuences can actually be proven. One exception remains, though: If physical inﬂu-
ences are likelier than expected,because the physical environment is different from
average,then (and only then) are you allowed to take such causes into account.Thus,
if the problem occurs in the hot chamber of some nuclear research facility feel free
to have someone check for sources of strong magnetic ﬁelds or alpha particles.

4.3.9 Effects of Debugging Tools
Another source that can alter a program’s behavior is the debugging process itself.
In fact, simply observing or examining the problem can cause the problem to
disappear—or to be replaced by another problem. Problems that behave in this
manner are known as Heisenbugs—in analogy to Heisenberg’s famous uncertainty
principle,which states that you cannot observe position and momentum of a particle
at the same time with arbitrary precision (the observation itself alters the situation
to be observed).
    One major source for Heisenbugs are differences between the debugging (i.e.,
observation) environment and the production environment, combined with unde-
ﬁned behavior of the program. As a simple example, consider the following short
C program.
   int f() {
       int i;
       return i;
   }
    Note that i is not initialized.Thus,the value of i as returned by f() is undeﬁned.
“Undeﬁned”means“undeﬁned by the C standard,”which again means that whatever
f() returns it all conforms to the C standard. In practice, though, f() will return
a deﬁnite value on many systems. Multiuser operating systems take care to start
processes only with initialized memory (typically zeroed), such that a process may
not examine the leftovers of other processes. Thus, in such an environment if f()
is the ﬁrst function being called it is likely to always return zero.
    Now consider f() being executed within an interactive debugger (see Chap-
ter 8). The debugger has no need to clear the leftovers of earlier processes. In
particular, if you run the program multiple times, f() may return a random leftover
from a previous run of the program, which may or may not be zero. Thus, running
the program in a debugger alters the program’s behavior—which may result in the
original problem being masked by another problem, or (worse) the problem not
occurring anymore at all.
    If you experience a Heisenbug,think about undeﬁned behavior in your program.
Undeﬁned behavior is almost always caused by a defect. In particular, consider the
following:
   ■ Check the data ﬂow of your program to identify uninitialized variables (see
     Section 7.5 in Chapter 7, on code smells).
   ■ Use system assertions to identify memory that is read before being written

     (see Section 10.8 in Chapter 10, on system assertions).
90   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems




       BUG STORY 7
       A print Statement Introduces a Heisenbug
       In the midst of a debugging session, I inserted a print statement such that I could
       observe what was going on. To my great surprise, the problem no longer occurred after
       I had inserted the print statement. Even more puzzling, after I removed the print
       statement the problem was still gone, although the program had been reverted to its
       original state. Well, the problem was gone, but I remained suspicious.
          When the problem resurfaced on our production machine, I went on investigating
       what had gone on. It turned out that there was a difference between the original and
       the reverted program: the executables were different. The problem was caused by a
       bug in the initial linker: a symbol had been resolved to a bad address. To insert the
       print statement, though, an alternate incremental linker had been used—and using
       this incremental linker ﬁxed the problem.


         Some languages are more prone to Heisenbugs than others (in particular, lan-
     guages where undeﬁned behavior is part of the semantics, such as C and C++).
     In more modern languages, such as JAVA and C#, almost every single aspect of
     the program execution is well deﬁned, including forced initialization of variables.
     Furthermore, these languages come with managed memory, giving every memory
     access a predictable outcome.
         You do not necessarily need a debugger to trigger a Heisenbug (any of the debug-
     ging techniques discussed in this book can trigger differences in behavior). Among
     the most obvious issues is that examining a program (interactively or not) can intro-
     duce timing issues, as discussed in Section 4.3.4. Recompilation for debugging
     might trigger bugs in the tool chain. Even something as innocuous as a print state-
     ment can alter the behavior of a program (Bug Story 7). The debugging tools, of
     course, may themselves be buggy, and this can lead programmers far astray from
     the actual problem cause.
         For these reasons, whenever there is the least suspicion the problem may be
     a Heisenbug it is always useful to double check and to observe the program by
     at least two independent means. In addition to Heisenbugs, computer jargon also
     introduced Schroedinbugs, Bohr bugs, and others (List 4.1 lists them all).




     4.4 REPRODUCING SYSTEM INTERACTION
     As seen in the previous section,the interface between a program and its environment
     becomes more and more difﬁcult to control the tighter the program is coupled to its
     environment. In other words, the more information the program and environment
     exchange and the more the program depends on this information,the more difﬁcult
     it will be to reproduce a given problem.
                                                               4.5 Focusing on Units          91



LIST 4.1: Jargon about Reproducible and Less-Reproducible Problems
Bohr bug (from quantum physics): A repeatable bug—one that manifests reliably under a
   possibly unknown but well-deﬁned set of conditions.
Heisenbug (from Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle in quantum physics): A bug that
   disappears or alters its behavior when one attempts to probe or isolate it.
Mandelbug (from the Mandelbrot set): A bug the underlying causes of which are so complex
  and obscure as to make its behavior appear chaotic or even nondeterministic. This term
  implies that the speaker thinks it is a Bohr bug, rather than a Heisenbug.
Schroedinbug (MIT: from the Schrödinger’s cat thought experiment in quantum physics):
   A design or implementation bug in a program that does not manifest until someone reading
   source code or using the program in an unusual way notices that it never should have
   worked, at which point the program promptly stops working for everybody until ﬁxed.
Source: Raymond (1996).


    One way to overcome this issue is to replay not only the program but its
environment—in fact, to record and replay every single aspect of the physical
machine executing the program. To do so, virtual machines (as discussed in
Section 3.3.2 in Chapter 3) come in handy.
    The REVIRT system uses a virtual machine called UMLinux (not to be con-
founded with the similarly named User-Mode-Linux) to record and replay all
interaction of a virtual machine. It uses a specially modiﬁed guest operating system
to reduce the overhead of virtualization. Compared to the computation directly on
the host, UMLinux virtualization adds an overhead of 58 percent to execution time.
REVIRT recording adds another overhead of 8 percent. This indicates that virtual
machines are feasible one-size-ﬁts-all solutions when it comes to control, record,
and replay program executions—if such a machine is available for the problem at
hand. The single major drawback is that the recorded scripts are difﬁcult to read,
let alone maintain.




4.5 FOCUSING ON UNITS
Another way of dealing with the coupling between program and environment is to
search for alternative interfaces that may be controlled, recorded, and replayed. In
Section 3.5 in Chapter 3 we saw how to control individual units of the program—
that is,subprograms,functions,libraries,modules,abstract data types,objects,classes,
packages, components, beans, or whatever decomposition the design and the
language provide.
   The idea now is not to reproduce the execution of the entire program but only
the execution of a speciﬁc unit. This has the advantage that controlling the unit
in isolation may be easier than controlling the entire program. The disadvantage,
92   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems




     FIGURE 4.5
     Controlling a unit’s interaction. Setting up a layer for a single unit controls its interaction with
     the other units.

     of course, is that you can only reproduce the behavior of the given unit—and thus
     must count on the unit producing the problem in isolation.

     4.5.1 Setting Up a Control Layer
     The basic scheme for controlling a single unit is sketched in Figure 4.5. Again, we
     set up a layer that isolates the unit from its other units. This unit control layer can
     be used to monitor, record, and replay the input.
        A control layer is a generalization of the STRACE tool (discussed in Section 4.3.6).
     Rather than setting up a layer between program and environment (operating sys-
     tem), we attempt to isolate arbitrary program units from their environment (the
     remainder of the program). This technique is typically used to isolate bottom-level
     units—that is, units
         ■   with services that are being used frequently by higher-level units, and
         ■   that do not rely on services provided by other units.
         Most such bottom-level units are concerned with elementary services such as
     storage and communication. To reproduce a problem in such a bottom-level unit, it
     is usually easier to record and replay the interaction at the unit boundary rather than
     reproducing the entire behavior of the application that uses the unit. The following
     are some examples:
     ■   Databases: To reproduce a problem in a database, record and replay the SQL
         transactions as issued by an application—rather than reexecuting the entire
         application.
     ■   Compilers: To reproduce a problem in a compiler, record and restore the
         intermediate data structures—rather than reexecuting the entire front end.
     ■   Networking: To reproduce a networking problem, record and replay the basic
         communication calls as issued by the application—rather than reexecuting the
         entire application.

     4.5.2 A Control Example
     As an example of a unit control layer, imagine a simple C++ class that realizes a
     mapping from strings to integers, as follows.
                                                           4.5 Focusing on Units         93



   class Map {
   public:
       virtual void add(string key, int value);
       virtual void del(string key);
       virtual int lookup(string key);
   };
    Our aim is to create a control layer that logs all input and output of such a map.
We also want to use the log to reproduce the interaction between the map and the
other units.That is,we need a means of reading the log and invoking the appropriate
Map methods.
    A very simple way of creating such means is to create the log as a stand-alone
program ﬁle. If, for instance, ﬁrst add("onions", 4) and then del("truffels")
is called,and ﬁnally lookup("onions") is called,the log ﬁle should read as follows.
   #include "Map.h"
   #include <assert>

   int main() {
       Map map;
       map.add("onions", 4);
       map.del("truffels");
       assert(map.lookup("onions") == 4);
       return 0;
   }
    This does not look like the log ﬁles you are used to, right? This log ﬁle can be
compiled and executed—and thus reproduces the interaction of a Map object with
its environment. Note that we use an assertion both to log and to verify the output
of the lookup() method. This way, the resulting log can also be used for regression
testing.
    To implement the logging functions,we have to overwrite the original Map meth-
ods. In an object-oriented language such as C++ , a simple way of doing so is to
create a subclass of Map with redeﬁned methods. (A more elegant alternative would
be aspects, discussed in Section 8.2.3 in Chapter 8.)
   class ControlledMap: public Map {
   public:
       typedef Map super;

        virtual void add(string key, int value);
        virtual void del(string key);
        virtual int lookup(string key);

        ControlledMap();                   // Constructor
        ControlledMap();                   // Destructor
   };
   Each of the ControlledMap() methods actually invokes the method of the Map
superclass, but also logs the invocation to the clog stream. As an example, consider
the add() method, as follows.
94   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems



        void ControlledMap::add(string key, int value)
        {
            clog « "map.add(\"" « key « "\", "
                 « value « ");" « endl;
            Map::add(key, value);
        }
     We do the same for the deletion method:
        void ControlledMap::del(string key)
        {
            clog « "map.del(\"" « key « "\");" « endl;
            Map::del(key);
        }
         For the lookup() methods, we also log the return value and enclose the whole
     into an assertion.
        virtual int ControlledMap::lookup(string key)
        {
            clog « "assert(map.lookup(\"" « key « "\") == ";
            int ret = Map::lookup(key);
            clog « ret « ");" « endl;
            return ret;
        }
         All three methods have a slight problem: If the key contains a character that
     cannot be enclosed literally in a C++ string, the resulting program will not compile.
     A better implementation would thus take care to translate such characters properly.
         The constructor and destructors of ControlledMap(), called when a
     ControlledMap() object is created and deleted, respectively, add some framework
     to the clog stream such that the output becomes a stand-alone compilation unit.
        ControlledMap::ControlledMap()
        {
            clog « "#include \"Map.h\"" « endl
                 « "#include <assert>" « endl
                 « "" « endl
                 « "int main() {" « endl
                 « "    Map map;" « endl;
        }

        ControlledMap:: ∼ ControlledMap()
        {
            clog « "    return 0;" « endl;
                 « "}" « endl;
        }

        How do we use this layer? We simply replace Map with ControlledMap() for
     some object in the program and thus have all interaction logged to clog. By diverting
     the log into a program ﬁle, we can always reproduce all Map interaction simply by
     compiling and executing the program ﬁle.As a side effect,the resulting program ﬁles
                                                                       4.5 Focusing on Units    95



can also be used as test cases and thus protect against regression. Such recorded
test cases are more abstract than recorded user interaction (see Section 4.3.2 on
reproducing input), and are thus more valuable for long-term use (integrating them
into unit test tools such as JUNIT is straightforward).

4.5.3 Mock Objects
In the ControlledMap() example, we have seen how to set up an object such
that it records all of its interaction. In addition to recording, though, we could
also set up an object such that it replays a previously recorded interaction. This
way, we could replace an original object with a mock object—an object that does
nothing but simulate the original object by replaying previously recorded inter-
action. This basic idea is illustrated in Figure 4.6. During capture, a special tool
logs all interactions between the original object and its clients. On replay, a mock
object replaces the original object,expecting and replaying the previously recorded
interaction.



 Capture


                         get()            get()

                           42              42

           Client                                       Original object
                                                                                   f()
                                                                                g()
                                                                             h()


                                           get()=42
                                           ...

                                                  Log



  Replay

                                  get()
                                    42


             Client                                      Mock object

FIGURE 4.6
Replaying unit interaction with mock objects. On replay, the mock object replays the behavior
of the original object.
96   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems



        Assume we have a MockMap available, which is able to replay interactions
     recorded earlier by ControlledMap(). Replaying the interaction from Section 4.5.2,
     such a MockMap object would:

         ■ Expect a call add("onions", 4) and do nothing
         ■ Expect a call del("truffels") and do nothing
         ■ Expect a call lookup("onions") and return 4


        Note that the MockMap does not actually store items; it simply faithfully replays
     the earlier behavior. For a simple container such as a map, this does not make that
     much of a difference. For complex items that are difﬁcult to move from one setting
     to another, however, a mock object can make a huge difference. As an example,
     consider a database installed at a user’s site. To reproduce a problem, you normally
     need to install and replicate the user’s database.
        This problem can be addressed by turning the database into a capture/replay
     mock object, as follows:

         1. We record the database interaction at the user’s site.
         2. We then forward the mock object (rather than the database) to the developer.
         3. Using the mock object,the developer can reproduce and examine the original
            run—without going into the hassle of reproducing the entire environment.

         Creating mock objects manually can be a large amount of programming work,
     especially for objects with complex interfaces. Recently, though, tools have begun
     to emerge that allow us to turn arbitrary objects into mock objects.These tools auto-
     matically examine the object interfaces and add recording and playback facilities.
     The tools also take care of the following issues:
     ■   Return values.The tool must generate mock objects for returned values.A query
         to a database typically returns a query result, which comes as an object. If
         the database is turned into a mock object, the query must also return a mock
         result.
     ■   Outgoing calls. The tool must capture and replay outgoing calls as well—
         that is, the mock object calls other objects using previously recorded calls.
         A mock object for a database, for instance, may call back methods of other
         objects as soon as a query result is available. Such outgoing calls must also be
         recorded.
     ■   Arguments. The tool must provide mock objects for arguments of outgoing
         calls. In the previous example, a method called back by a mock database must
         be provided with (mock) arguments.
     ■   Variables. The tool must monitor direct read and write access to object variables,
         such that these accesses can also be mocked.
        At the time of this writing, such capture/replay mock objects are still research
     prototypes. However,the approach can be applied to arbitrary objects (or units) and
     thus nicely generalizes to all problems recording and reproducing unit behavior.
                                                         4.6 Reproducing Crashes           97



4.5.4 Controlling More Unit Interaction
Layers as sketched in the previous examples monitor and reproduce only function
calls. However, there may be more ways in which the unit depends on its environ-
ment. If a unit works in isolation,but not within the application,there must be some
interaction that is not yet adequately monitored.
■   Variables. Some units provide variables the application can access to alter the
    unit’s behavior, or to retrieve query results. Such implicit communication via
    variables must also be monitored and controlled, which requires a lot of work
    unless you use a capture/replay mock tool (as discussed in Section 4.5.3).
■   Other units. Some units depend on other units,which may also be controlled by
    the application. Be sure to capture and restore the state of these units as well. If
    needed, break the dependence (see Section 3.6 in Chapter 3, on isolating units).
■   Time. Some units (or more precisely, some problems within units) depend on a
    speciﬁc amount of time that must elapse between function calls. If needed, you
    may wish to record and replay these time intervals.
    Obviously,the more possibilities there are for an application to alter the behavior
of a unit the more difﬁcult it becomes to isolate the unit from the application. At this
point, it becomes clear how a good program design (as discussed in Section 3.7 in
Chapter 3) has a positive impact on debugging efforts. The less information being
exchanged between units, and the less dependences there are between units, the
easier it becomes to control and reproduce unit behavior. Thus, a good design not
only makes a program easier to understand, maintain, restructure, and reuse, but
also to debug.



4.6 REPRODUCING CRASHES
While recording and replaying arbitrary runs remains a technical challenge, there is
a special case in which recording and replaying has shown to be both efﬁcient and
effective. When a program crashes, its state at the moment of the crash is available
for analysis—including all currently active functions,all arguments,and all variables.
Could one leverage this state to reproduce the failure? This is the aim of test case
extraction, which takes a crashing program run and automatically generates a test
case that reproduces the crash.
    To illustrate the concept of test case extraction, consider the BankAccount class
in Example 4.3. When the main() method is executed with assertions enabled, we
obtain the following error message.
    $ javac BankAccount.java
    $ java -ea BankAccount
    Exception in thread "main" java.lang.AssertionError: negative
    balance
            at BankAccount.withdraw(BankAccount.java:22)
            at BankAccount.main(BankAccount.java:31)
    $ _
98   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems




     EXAMPLE 4.3: BankAccount.java—a simple bank account with assertions
     class BankAccount {
         public int balance;

         BankAccount(int initial_balance) {
             balance = initial_balance;
         }

         public void deposit(int amount) {
             int old_balance = balance;
             balance = balance + amount;

              assert balance > old_balance: "negative amount";
              assert balance >= 0: "negative balance";
         }

         public void withdraw(int amount) {
             int old_balance = balance;
             balance = balance --- amount;

              assert balance < old_balance: "negative amount";
              assert balance >= 0: "negative balance";
         }

         public int balance() {
             return this.balance;
         }

         public static void main(String[] args) {
             BankAccount account = new BankAccount(100);
             account.withdraw(1000);

              System.out.println(account.balance());
         }
     }


        The error message reports the stack of functions that were active at the
     moment of the crash: main() invoked withdraw(), which in turn threw an
     AssertionError as the "negative balance" assertion was violated.
         How would we reproduce this failure? While the program state is still available,
     we can call arbitrary methods on arbitrary objects. In particular, we can repeat the
     method calls that just failed, and see whether this would reproduce the failure.
     Suppose we repeat the failing method call account.withdraw(1000): We will
     experience the same failure again and again. All we need is a snapshot of the state
     (or, more precisely, of the account object) at the moment of invocation—and we
     can easily reproduce calls again and again.
         Unfortunately,when the program has crashed,the original state at the moment of
     invocation is already lost. In the BankAccount example, when the error is detected,
                                                       4.6 Reproducing Crashes           99



the balance already is altered. (This is a defect:The BankAccount assertions should
not only check their postconditions, but also check the arguments as part of the
precondition. See Chapter 10 for details.) We therefore must monitor the original
calls and the state of the moment of the call—a technique that can quickly get
expensive. Such monitoring techniques have been explored by two research groups,
one at ETH Zurich for the Eiffel programming language in a tool called Cdd, and one
at MIT for Java programs in a tool called ReCrash. They came up with the following
three alternatives:
Keep a copy of the calling stack. This technique keeps a shadow copy of the call
   stack and all arguments at invocation time. In our example, the shadow stack
   would contain the call account.withdraw(1000), keeping a copy of both the
   argument (1000) as well as the account object with its original balance of 100.
  With this copied information, one can always reproduce the original call.
       The advantage of this approach is that it allows for faithful reproduction of
   arbitrary method calls. Its disadvantage is that keeping a shadow copy induces
   overhead—with the overhead being the lowest if just references are copied,and
   getting higher the deeper the shadow copy is. In our example, just keeping a
   reference to account would not sufﬁce, as account changes its state.
       In their experiments, the MIT team experienced overheads between 11 and
   42 percent (for just references) and 12,000 and 638,000 percent (for deep state
   copies). The best compromise was achieved by a used ﬁelds mode, perform-
   ing deeper copying on ﬁelds that are read or written in the method—as the
   account.balance ﬁeld in our example—and a shallow copying for all other
   objects. The used ﬁelds mode had a overhead of 13–50 percent, and was able to
   reproduce all crashes faithfully.
Use the failing state instead of the invocation state. To reduce the monitoring
   overhead, the ETH team explored another technique: Rather than trying to mon-
   itor (and later reproduce) the original state, they explored whether one could
   reproduce the failure in the (possibly modiﬁed) state at the moment of the
   crash.
       The advantage of this “failing state” approach is that no monitoring at all is
   required;the only overhead occurs at the time of the crash,when the entire state
   is copied for later reproduction. The disadvantage is that the failing state may
   not be a surrogate for the invocation state. In the BankAccount example, this
   would mean to invoke account.withdraw(1000) on an account in the failing
   state—that is, on an account that already has an invalid balance of ⫺900:
      account = new BankAccount(-900);
      account.withdraw(1000);

       If we execute this extracted test case,the program fails on the same assertion
   as the original failure; although the state is different, the essential features of
   the crash are preserved. However, the example also illustrates how brittle the
   technique can be: Any assertion against an illegal state in the BankAccount()
100   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems



        constructor would yield the approach unusable. Yet, in their experiments, the
        ETH team was able to reproduce 90 percent of the failures using the state at
        failure time.
      Wait for a second chance. As another alternative to reduce the monitoring over-
        head, the MIT team suggested a so-called second chance mode. In this setting,
        the original program is not monitored at all; only after the crash, monitoring is
        activated only for those very locations involved in the crash. Thus, when the
        failure occurs a second time, it will be monitored. In our example, for instance,
        the withdraw() method would be monitored as soon as it fails once.
            The obvious disadvantage of second chance mode is that it can only reproduce
        a failure the second time it occurred; also, activating monitoring in an already
        deployed program may be complicated. The advantage of this approach is that it
        has zero monitoring overhead in the original (failing) run. Even after monitoring
        is activated,the overhead stays low,as it focuses only on speciﬁc parts of program
        and state. In their experiments, the MIT team observed an overhead of around
        1 percent, which is very tolerable in practice.
         A possible synthesis of these three approaches looks as follows. First, try to
      reproduce the failure with just the failing state, which provides a high chance of
      reproducing the failure without any monitoring. In case reproduction is not possible,
      deploy a light weight monitoring and wait for the failure to occur for a second time.
         Overall, though, one should keep in mind that these techniques work better the
      sooner an infection is detected. If an infection is not detected for a long time, the
      crash may be reproduced, but the origin of the infection is lost. As an example,
      consider the following code.
         Record record = getDatabaseRecord("1234");
         processRecord(record);
          Now assume that the record returned by getDatabaseRecord() is invalid (say,
      a null reference). If we pass it to processRecord(), we will experience a crash.
      ReCrash and Cdd will be able to reproduce this crash, by rebuilding the invalid
      record, and passing it to processRecord(). For the developer, though, the crucial
      point is not to be able to reproduce just the crash—it is to reproduce the entire
      chain of events that led to the creation of the invalid record. In the remainder of
      the book (and particularly in Chapter 13), we explore how to identify such event
      chains.
          On the other hand, if the infection is detected soon enough (say, as a runtime
      check in getDatabaseRecord()), the reproduced crash will point developers
      directly to the place the defect occurred. It is therefore no surprise that the
      original concept of reproducing crashes was developed as part of design by con-
      tract, meaning that every single function of the program is checked for its pre-
      and postconditions—an approach with several beneﬁts for debugging, and, as we
      see here, also for reproducing errors. Design by contract is covered further in
      Chapter 10.
                                                                        4.8 Tools     101




4.7 CONCEPTS
Once a problem is tracked, the next step is to reproduce it in your environment.
To reproduce a problem:                                                             How To
    ■ Reproduce its environment (Section 4.2)
    ■ Reproduce the execution (Section 4.3 and later)

To reproduce the problem environment:
    ■ Start with your environment
    ■ Adopt one circumstance of the problem environment after the other

For details, see Section 4.2.
To reproduce the problem execution, place a control layer between the program’s
   input and the input as perceived by the program (Figure 4.2). Such a control
   layer can be used to monitor, control, capture, and replay the program’s input.
Technically, one realizes a control layer by intercepting calls to input functions.
Inputs that can be (and frequently must be) controlled include:
    ■ Data (Section 4.3.1)

    ■ User inputs (Section 4.3.2)
    ■ Communications (Section 4.3.3)
    ■ Time (Section 4.3.4)
    ■ Randomness (Section 4.3.5)
    ■ Operating environment (Section 4.3.6)
    ■ Process schedules (Section 4.3.7)


Physics (Section 4.3.8) and debugging tools (Section 4.3.9) can inﬂuence a pro-
    gram’s behavior in unintended ways.
Executing on a virtual machine gives the best possibilities for recording and
    replaying interaction.
To reproduce unit behavior, place a control layer between the unit’s input and the
    input as perceived by the unit (Figure 4.5).
Mock objects can provide a general means of recording and replaying the interaction
   of arbitrary units.
To reproduce a crash, record the program state at the moment of the crash and
   attempt to replay the failing methods.



4.8 TOOLS
Winrunner. Tools that record and replay user input are commonly used for
  testing. HP provides the Quick Test Professional testing tool that provides
  record/replay facilities for Windows. An introduction can be found at http://
  mercuryquicktestprofessional.blogspot.com/.
102   CHAPTER 4 Reproducing Problems



      Android. The ANDROID package, unfortunately, is no longer available for down-
        load; an Internet search may help you out.
      Revirt. The REVIRT system by Dunlap et al. (2002) allows you to record and
        replay the interaction of an entire machine. This is found at http://www.
        eecs.umich.edu/virtual/.

      Checkpointing Tools
      Regarding checkpointing, a variety of research tools are available. Such tools allow
      “freezing” a running process such that it can be resumed later, even on a different
      machine. For details, see http://www.checkpointing.org/.
      ReCrash. The ReCrash tool for Java, allowing for recording and replaying of
        crashes, is available at http://pag.csail.mit.edu/ReCrash.
      Cdd. The Cdd prototype, providing automatic test extraction for crashing EIFFEL
        programs, is now part of the EIFFEL studio development environment, freely
        available at http://www.eiffel.com/.



      4.9 FURTHER READING
      When it comes to capturing and replaying more than just user interaction, tools
      are less in a product than in a research prototype stage. Ronsse et al. (2003) give
      an excellent introduction to the ﬁeld of making program executions deterministic
      by recording and replaying their interaction with the environment. They also give
      pointers on how to replay message passing and shared memory.
         Choi and Srinivasan (1998) and Konuru et al. (2000) describe the DEJAVU tool
      that allows for deterministic replay of multithreaded and even distributed JAVA
      applications. Among others, DEJAVU records and replays input as well as thread
      schedules. Mock objects for capturing and replaying object interaction are dis-
      cussed by Saff and Ernst (2004a). The Cdd tool is described in Leitner et al. (2007).
      Artzi et al. (2008) describe ReCrash and their experiments with it.



      EXERCISES
      4.1 Use ANDROID (or a similar tool) to record and replay a user session with a
          Web browser. Can you use the script on a different machine or a different
          window manager?
      4.2 A recorded user interaction script typically simply records the delays between
          events, rather than synchronizing with the program output. An example
          of synchronization might be waiting for a dialog window to appear before
          continuing to simulate input. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of
          synchronization.
                                                             4.9 Further Reading        103



4.3 Use STRACE (or a similar tool) to monitor the interaction of ls (or a similar
    simple command). For each of the calls reported:
    (a) Look it up in the manual.
    (b) Estimate the effort for recording and replaying the information passed.
    Start with calls you know (say, open, close, read, and write) and proceed to
    lesser-known calls.
4.4   Extend the unit capture scheme of Section 4.5.2 such that the generated log
      becomes a test case for a unit test framework such as CPPUNIT or JUNIT.
4.5 Which events should be recorded to create a capture/replay tool for:
    (a) Random numbers and time events?
    (b) Kernel interaction?
    How can program design support use this capture/replay tool?
4.6 “If I cannot reproduce a problem,it must be the user’s fault.”Discuss this state-
    ment, given a program with nondeterministic behavior and an environment
    that is difﬁcult to reproduce.
4.7 “Not every infection of a program state needs to stem from a defect. There
    could be a bit ﬂip in a memory cell, due to an energy impulse, that caused the
    infection.” Discuss.
4.8   If one uses a tool like Cdd or ReCrash to reproduce crashes,one can choose an
      arbitrary function on the call stack to be replayed.What are the advantages and
      disadvantages of replaying the most recently called functions versus replaying
      older functions (say, the original invocation to main())?




 Here also are huge men having horns four feet long,
 and there are serpents also of such magnitude
 that they can eat an ox whole.
                                                                 – MAP INSCRIPTION
                                            Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana (1430)


 For every fact, there is an inﬁnity of hypotheses.
                                                                  – ROBERT PIRSIG
                               Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance (1974)
                                                                           CHAPTER


Simplifying Problems
                                                                              5
Once we have reproduced a problem, we must simplify it—that is, we must ﬁnd
out which circumstances are not relevant for the problem and can thus be omitted.
This process results in a test case that contains only the relevant circumstances.
In the best case, a simpliﬁed test case report immediately pinpoints the defect. In
this chapter, we introduce delta debugging, an automated debugging method that
simpliﬁes test cases automatically.



5.1 SIMPLIFYING THE PROBLEM
After one has reproduced a problem, the next step in debugging is to ﬁnd out what
is relevant and what is not. Does the problem really depend on the entire 10,000
lines of input? Is it really necessary to replay all of these interaction steps? Does the
failure occur only if this exact schedule of events takes place? Do I really need this
long sequence of recorded method calls?
    This stage of debugging is known as simplifying, meaning to turn a detailed
problem report into a simple test case. A test case contains the relevant details only.
A detail of the problem report is relevant if it is required to make the problem occur.
It is irrelevant if the problem occurs whether the detail is present or not.
    Why is simpliﬁcation important? As an analogy, consider a simple ﬂight test. An
airplane crashes a few seconds after taking off.To ﬁnd out what happened,we repeat
the ﬂight in a simulator.
     Even if we do not have a clue about how planes work,we can still ﬁnd out what is
relevant and what is not, by repeating the ﬂight over and over again under changed
circumstances.For instance,we might take out the passenger seats and ﬁnd that the
plane still crashes. We might take out the coffee machine and the plane still crashes.
We might take out the engines and—oops, the plane does not move off the runway.
Obviously, the engines are important!
     Eventually,only the relevant“simpliﬁed”skeleton remains,including a (simulated)
test pilot, the wings, the runway, the fuel, and the engines. Each part of this skeleton
is relevant for reproducing the crash.
    To explain how the crash came to be, we need every single part of this skeleton.
However, the value of simpliﬁcation is less in the remaining parts but rather in all        105
106   CHAPTER 5 Simplifying Problems



      parts that have been taken away—all of the irrelevant details (such as the coffee,
      machine that did not contribute to the crash. The general process for simplifying a
      problem report follows a simple rule:
         For every circumstance of the problem, check whether it is relevant for the
         problem to occur. If it is not, remove it from the problem report or the test case
         in question.
         A circumstance is any aspect that may inﬂuence the problem—in short,the same
      circumstances one needs to reproduce the problem (see Chapter 4). In particular,
      these are:
         ■   Aspects of the problem environment
         ■   Individual steps in the problem history
          How does one check whether a circumstance is relevant? You do this by exper-
      imenting. That is, you omit the circumstance and try to reproduce the problem.
      If the problem no longer occurs, the circumstance is relevant. If the problem still
      occurs, the circumstance is irrelevant. As McConnell (1993) puts it: “The goal of
      simplifying the test case is to make it so simple that changing any aspect of it
      changes the behavior of the error.”
          This is exactly our key question:

        HOW DO WE SIMPLIFY TEST CASES SYSTEMATICALLY AND AUTOMATICALLY?




      5.2 THE GECKO BUGATHON
      Simpliﬁcation of test cases is not an academic problem. Consider a real-world exam-
      ple, related to the MOZILLA Web browser—or more speciﬁcally, its HTML layout
      engine Gecko. In July 1999, two years before the ﬁnal completion of MOZILLA 1.0,
      BUGZILLA (the MOZILLA problem database) listed database) listed more than
      370 open problem reports—problem reports that were not even reproduced.
          In Example 3.1 we have already seen one of these open problem reports,reported
      by a MOZILLA user in 1999. This problem report is already close to perfection: it
      is short, reproducible, and precise. It can also easily be automated, as discussed
      in Chapter 3. The problem, though, is that the Web page in question—the page at
      http://bugzilla.mozilla.org—was 896 lines of quite obfuscated HTML code (shown
      in Example 5.1). Loading this HTML code into Gecko HTML input made MOZILLA
      fail—but what? made MOZILLA fail—but what?
          Obviously, reading this HTML code does not give us any hints about possible
      failure causes. If we were MOZILLA programmers,what we want here is the simplest
      HTML input that still produces the failure—and hopefully pinpoints the failure
      cause.
                                                       5.2 The Gecko BugAThon           107




EXAMPLE 5.1: Printing this HTML page (excerpt) makes MOZILLA crash
<td align=left valign=top>
<SELECT NAME="op_sys" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>
<OPTION VALUE="All">All<OPTION VALUE="Windows 3.1">Windows 3.1<OPTION
VALUE="Windows 95">Windows 95<OPTION VALUE="Windows 98">Windows 98<OPTION
VALUE="Windows ME">Windows ME<OPTION VALUE="Windows 2000">Windows
2000<OPTION VALUE="Windows NT">Windows NT<OPTION VALUE="Mac System 7">Mac
System 7<OPTION VALUE="Mac System 7.5">Mac System 7.5<OPTION VALUE="Mac
System 7.6.1">Mac System 7.6.1<OPTION VALUE="Mac System 8.0">Mac System
8.0<OPTION VALUE="Mac System 8.5">Mac System 8.5<OPTION VALUE="Mac
System 8.6">Mac System 8.6<OPTION VALUE="Mac System 9.x">Mac System
9.x<OPTION VALUE="MacOS X">MacOS X<OPTION VALUE="Linux">Linux<OPTION
VALUE="BSDI">BSDI<OPTION VALUE="FreeBSD">FreeBSD<OPTION
VALUE="NetBSD">NetBSD<OPTION VALUE="OpenBSD">OpenBSD<OPTION
VALUE="AIX">AIX<OPTION VALUE="BeOS">BeOS<OPTION VALUE="HP-UX">HP-UX<OPTION
VALUE="IRIX">IRIX<OPTION VALUE="Neutrino">Neutrino<OPTION
VALUE="OpenVMS">OpenVMS<OPTION VALUE="OS/2">OS/2<OPTION
VALUE="OSF/1">OSF/1<OPTION VALUE="Solaris">Solaris<OPTION
VALUE="SunOS">SunOS<OPTION VALUE="other">other</SELECT>
</td>
<td align=left valign=top>
<SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>
<OPTION VALUE="-">-<OPTION VALUE="P1">P1<OPTION VALUE="P2">P2<OPTION
VALUE="P3">P3<OPTION VALUE="P4">P4<OPTION VALUE="P5">P5</SELECT>
</td>
<td align=left valign=top>
<SELECT NAME="bug_severity" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>
<OPTION VALUE="blocker">blocker<OPTION VALUE="critical">critical<OPTION
VALUE="major">major<OPTION VALUE="normal">normal<OPTION
VALUE="minor">minor<OPTION VALUE="trivial">trivial<OPTION
VALUE="enhancement">enhancement</SELECT>
</tr>
</table>




    A simpliﬁed test case not only helps in ﬁnding failure causes, though. There are
at least three further good reasons for simplifying:
1. A simpliﬁed test case is easier to communicate. The simpler a test case, the
   less time it takes to write it down, to read its description, and to reproduce it.
   In addition, you know that the remaining details are all relevant because the
   irrelevant details have been taken away. In our example, is it relevant that the
   margins be set to .50? If the failure occurs nonetheless, we can leave out this
   detail.
2. A simpliﬁed test case facilitates debugging. Typically, a simpliﬁed test case
   means less input (and thus smaller program states to examine) and less interaction
108   CHAPTER 5 Simplifying Problems



         with the environment (and thus shorter program runs to understand). Obviously,
         if the HTML code in Example 5.1 can be simpliﬁed to a small number of HTML
         tags, the state of Gecko would be much easier to examine. In the best case,
         the HTML tag could even directly lead to the error.
      3. Simpliﬁed test cases identify duplicate problem reports. As discussed in
         Section 2.8 in Chapter 2, duplicate problem reports can ﬁll up your problem
         database. Simpliﬁed test cases typically subsume several duplicate problem
         reports that differ only in irrelevant details. If we know that some speciﬁc HTML
         tag causes printing to fail, we can search for this HTML tag in other problem
         reports, marking them as duplicates.
          Despite these beneﬁts, new problem reports came in quicker than MOZILLA
      programmers could possibly simplify them or even look at them. With this queue
      growing further, the MOZILLA engineers “faced imminent doom.”
          But then, Eric Krock, MOZILLA product manager, had a clever idea: Why not
      have volunteers simplify test cases? Thus, Krock started what became the Gecko
      BugAThon: Volunteers would help the MOZILLA programmers by creating simpli-
      ﬁed test cases. To simplify test cases, you do not have to be a programmer. All you
      need is a text editor (as shown in List 5.1). The entire process boils down to remov-
      ing parts of the page and periodically rerunning MOZILLA until all remaining input
      is relevant.
          As an incentive, Krock offered rewards for simpliﬁed test cases. For 5 problem
      reports turned into simpliﬁed test cases, a volunteer would be invited to the launch
      party. For 10 test cases,he or she would also get an attractive Gecko stuffed animal,
      and 20 test cases would earn him or her aT-shirt signed by the grateful engineers.This
      simple scheme worked out very well; because of the large number of enthusiastic
      volunteers on the Web the very ﬁrst night a number of volunteers earned their
      stuffed animal by staying up late and simplifying test cases.


      LIST 5.1: Instructions for Simplifying HTML Pages Manually
      ■   Download the Web page that shows the bug to your local machine.
      ■   Using a text editor (such as Notepad on Windows, SimpleText on the Mac, or vi or emacs
          on UNIX), start removing HTML markup, CSS rules, and lines of JavaScript from the page.
          Start by commenting out parts of the page (using <!-- -->) that seem unrelated to the
          bug. Every few minutes, check the page to make sure it still reproduces the bug. Code
          not required to reproduce the bug can be safely removed.
      ■   You will do well if you use an editor supporting multiple levels of Undo, and better if you
          use an HTML-editing tool that supports preview to an external browser.
      ■   When you have cut away as much HTML, CSS, and JavaScript as you can—and cutting
          away any more causes the bug to disappear—you are done.
      Source: mozilla.org.
                                                        5.3 Manual Simpliﬁcation          109




5.3 MANUAL SIMPLIFICATION
How would a MOZILLA volunteer proceed in an actual example? Let’s apply the
instructions in List 5.1 on the HTML input in Example 5.1.We use a method sketched
by Kernighan and Pike (1999):
   Proceed by binary search. Throw away half the input and see if the output is
   still wrong; if not, go back to the previous state and discard the other half of
   the input.
This divide-and-conquer process is sketched in Figure 5.1.

   1. The gray bar stands for the HTML input—initially 896 lines that cause
      MOZILLA to fail ().
   2. Using a text editor, we cut away the second half of the input (shown in light
      gray), leaving only the ﬁrst half (dark gray), and repeat the test with this
      418-line input. MOZILLA still crashes ().
   3. Again, we cut away the second half, leaving only 224 lines. Still, MOZILLA
      crashes.
   4. When we again cut away the second half, leaving only 112 lines, MOZILLA
      just works ().
   5. We undo the earlier cut and cut away the ﬁrst half instead. When being fed
      with these 112 lines, MOZILLA again crashes.
   6. We continue simplifying the input.
   7. After 12 tests, one single line with a <SELECT> tag is left:
             <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>

      (This HTML line in http://bugzilla.mozilla.org/ is used to have users input
      the problem priority of a report.)

   We have now simpliﬁed the problem report from 896 lines to 1 single line.
Further testing shows that the tag attributes are irrelevant, too, and thus all we need
to cause the problem is an input of <SELECT>.

              1                                                 (896 lines)
              2                                                 (448 lines)
              3                                                 (224 lines)
              4                                                 (112 lines)
              5                                                 (112 lines)
              6                                               (56 lines)
               ..
                .
             12 <SELECT_NAME="priority"_MULTIPLE_SIZE=7> (40 characters)

FIGURE 5.1
Simplifying the HTML input from Example 5.1.
110   CHAPTER 5 Simplifying Problems



         Having simpliﬁed this problem is very beneﬁcial. In particular, it helps in:
         ■ Communication: All one needs is the three-word summary “Printing
           <SELECT> crashes.”
         ■ Debugging: A MOZILLA programmer can immediately focus to the piece of

           code that handles printing of <SELECT> tags.
         ■ Duplicates: A Bugzilla maintainer can scan the database for other problems

           with printing, and if <SELECT> is part of the respective HTML input, chances
           are that they are all duplicates of each other.



      5.4 AUTOMATIC SIMPLIFICATION
      Manual simpliﬁcation, as demonstrated in Section 5.3, has important beneﬁts.
      However, these come at a price:
         ■   Simpliﬁcation is tedious.You have to run tests manually all over again.
         ■   Simpliﬁcation is boring. It is a rather mechanical activity without great intel-
             lectual challenge.
        As with so many other tedious and boring activities, one may wonder whether it
      would not be possible to automate the simpliﬁcation process. And indeed, it can.
      Once again, we illustrate the basic idea using the MOZILLA example:
         ■ We set up an automatic test that determines whether MOZILLA fails to print
           on some speciﬁc input.
         ■ We implement a strategy that realizes the binary search strategy mentioned

           earlier, running the test on some subset of the HTML page.
          Setting up an automatic test for MOZILLA is not too difﬁcult, applying the basic
      strategies from Chapter 4: We have MOZILLA read its input from ﬁle (rather than
      from the network), and use record/replay to automate the user interaction from
      Example 3.1. The test can thus be realized as follows:
      1. Launch MOZILLA.
      2. Use Capture and Replay to:
         ■ Load the HTML page into MOZILLA
         ■ Set printing settings as described in the problem report

         ■ Print the page

      3. Wait for a certain amount of time to see whether:
         ■ MOZILLA crashes—that is, the test fails ()

         ■ Whether it is still alive—that is, the test passes ()

      4. If MOZILLA should not start, or if it fails for some other reason, our test returns.
          Let’s consider the second part: to design an automatic simpliﬁcation strategy
      using such an automatic test. As a starting point,we simply adapt the“binary search”
      strategy from Section 5.3:
                                                    5.4 Automatic Simpliﬁcation         111



    1. Cut away half the input and check if the test returns . If so, continue
       the process with the remaining half.
    2. Otherwise, go back to the previous state and discard the other half of
       the input.
    This simple description has a drawback: What do we do if neither half fails
the test—that is, testing the ﬁrst half passes and testing the second half passes
as well? As an example, consider Example 5.2, where we attempt to simplify the
remaining HTML line by characters. Again,input that has been cut away is shown in
gray characters. Neither the ﬁrst nor second half is valid HTML, and thus MOZILLA
interprets the input as text and the test does not fail.
    A simple binary search does not sufﬁce any longer, in that we are not searching
for a single character but for a subset of the input. In this example, the subset we
are searching for is the string <SELECT>, spread across the two input halves.
    How do we deal with this situation? The answer is not to cut away halves of the
input, but smaller parts—quarters, for instance. Thus, instead of cutting away the
ﬁrst half, we cut away the ﬁrst quarter, the second quarter, and so on.
    This process is illustrated in Example 5.3, continuing the example from
Example 5.2. Removing the ﬁrst quarter (step 4, the ﬁrst 10 characters) still
does not cause the problem to occur, but removing the second quarter (step 5,
characters 11–20) is successful. MOZILLA fails.
    Now that we have a failure on a simpliﬁed input, should we go back to cutting
away halves or should we continue with quarters? One could argue that we should
at least test all subsets at the given granularity.Thus,we continue removing quarters
(Step 6) until the last one (Step 7).
    If removing neither quarter makes the test fail, we continue with eighths, and
then sixteenths,and so on. Eventually,we will thus come down to a point where we
remove single characters—and end up in an input where removing any character
causes the problem to disappear (a single <SELECT> tag).Thus,our automatic simpli-
ﬁcation strategy has eventually cut away everything that is irrelevant for producing


EXAMPLE 5.2: Simplifying a single line
1    <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>            40 characters      
2    <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>            20 characters      
3    <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>            20 characters      




EXAMPLE 5.3: Simplifying by quarters
4    <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>            30 characters      
5    <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>            30 characters      
6    <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>            20 characters      
7    <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>            10 characters      
112   CHAPTER 5 Simplifying Problems



      the problem—and has done so only by trial and error, without any knowledge of
      the and error, without any knowledge of the program or the input.



      5.5 A SIMPLIFICATION ALGORITHM
      Let’s now write down a general algorithm that realizes the automatic strategy
      sketched in Section 5.4. We have some test function test(c) that takes some input c
      and determines whether the failure in question occurs (,“fail”) or not (,“pass”)
      or whether something different happens ( ,“unresolved”).
         Assume we have some failure-inducing input c that we can split into subsets. If
      we split c into two subsets c1 and c2 , three things can happen:
         ■ Removing ﬁrst half fails.If test (c \ c1 ) ⫽ ,we can continue with c ⫽ c \ c1 .
           (c is the value for c in the next iteration.)
         ■ Removing second half fails. Otherwise, if test (c \ c2 ) ⫽ , we can continue

           with c ⫽ c \ c2 .
         ■ Increase granularity.Otherwise,we must increase the granularity and split c
           into four (eight, sixteen, and so on) subsets.
         To accommodate the last case, we must generalize our description to an arbi-
      trary number of subsets n. If we split c into n subsets c1 to cn , we get:
         ■ Some removal fails. If test (c \ ci ) ⫽  holds for some i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, continue
           with c ⫽ c \ ci and n ⫽ max(n ⫺ 1, 2).
                                                                   
         ■ Increase granularity. Otherwise, continue with c ⫽ c and n ⫽ 2n. If c
                                                                                     

           cannot be split into more subsets, we are done.
          Let’s generalize this further. Data input is just one way to determine a program’s
      execution. In Chapter 4, we saw the inﬂuence of other circumstances such as
      time, communications, or thread schedules. We call such a set of circumstances
      that inﬂuence program behavior a conﬁguration.
          Our aim is now to ﬁnd a minimal set of circumstances under which the failure
      occurs. That is, we want to minimize a failure-inducing conﬁguration (to mini-
      mize the “failing” conﬁguration c ). In the MOZILLA case, the HTML input is such a
      conﬁguration—a set of circumstances that determine MOZILLA’s execution—and
      we want to minimize this far as possible.
         This generalization ends up in the ddmin algorithm shown in List 5.2, as pro-
      posed by Zeller and Hildebrandt (2002). Its core, the ddmin function, gets two
      arguments: the conﬁguration (input) to be simpliﬁed (denoted as c ) and the
      granularity n. Depending on test results, ddmin invokes itself recursively with a
      smaller c (“some removal fails”), invokes itself recursively with double granularity
      (“increase granularity”), or ends the recursion.
          ddmin is an instance of delta debugging—a general approach to isolate fail-
      ure causes by narrowing down differences (deltas) between runs. (More precisely,
                                                                 5.5 A Simpliﬁcation Algorithm           113



LIST 5.2: The ddmin Algorithm in a Nutshell
■   Let a program’s execution be determined by a set of circumstances called a conﬁguration.
    The set of all circumstances is denoted by C.
■   Let test : 2C → {, , } be a testing function that determines for a conﬁguration c ⊆ C
    whether some given failure occurs () or not () or whether the test is unresolved ().
■   Let c be a “failing” conﬁguration with c ⊆ C such that test(c ) ⫽ , and let the test pass
    if no circumstances are present [i.e., test (∅) ⫽ ].
■   The minimizing delta debugging algorithm ddmin(c ) minimizes the failure-inducing con-
    ﬁguration c . It returns a conﬁguration c ⫽ ddmin(c ) such that c ⊆ c and test(c ) ⫽ 
    hold and c is a relevant conﬁguration—that is, no single circumstance of c can be
    removed from c to make the failure disappear.
■   The ddmin algorithm is deﬁned as ddmin(c ) ⫽ ddmin (c , 2) with
      ddmin (c , n)
          ⎧ 
          ⎪
          ⎪ c                                           if |c | ⫽ 1
          ⎪
          ⎪          
          ⎪
          ⎨ddmin (c \ ci , max(n ⫺ 1, 2))              else if ∃i ∈ {1 ... n} ⫻ test (c \ ci ) ⫽ 
        ⫽                                                   (“some removal fails”)
          ⎪
          ⎪
          ⎪
          ⎪ ddmin (c , min(2n, |c |))               else if n ⬍ |c | (“increase granularity”)
          ⎪
          ⎩ 
            c                                           otherwise
where c ⫽ c1 ∪ c2 ∪ · · · ∪ cn such that ᭙ci , cj ⫻ ci ∩ cj ⫽ ∅ ∧ |ci | ≈ |cj | holds.
    The recursion invariant (and thus precondition) for ddmin is test (c ) ⫽  ∧ n ⭐ |c |.


ddmin is a “minimizing” variant of delta debugging.) Delta debugging again is is an
instance of adaptive testing—a series of tests in which each test depends on the
results of earlier tests.
    Let’s turn the abstract ddmin algorithm into a concrete implementation.
Example 5.4 shows a PYTHON implementation of ddmin, in which ddmin’s tail
recursion and existential quantiﬁers have been changed into nested loops. The
implementation relies on a function split(l, n), which splits a list l into n sub-
lists of roughly equal size (Example 5.5).The function listminus(c1, c2) returns
a list of all elements that are in the list c1 but not in the list c2 (Example 5.6). The
constants PASS, FAIL, and UNRESOLVED , and , respectively.
    The while and if constructions have the usual meaning (as in C-like languages,
the break statement leaves the enclosing loop). The assert statements document
the preconditions and loop invariants.
    In addition to these functions, we need an implementation of the test() func-
tion. Example 5.7 shows a (simpliﬁed) version of the test() function used by
Zeller and Hildebrandt (2002) on a LINUX system. Essentially, it invokes a MOZILLA
process and checks its outcome. If it exited normally (indicated by a zero exit status),
test() returns  (PASS). If it crashed (in UNIX: “terminated by a signal 11”), test()
returns (FAIL), and if anything else happens, test() returns  (UNRESOLVED).
114   CHAPTER 5 Simplifying Problems




      EXAMPLE 5.4: A PYTHON implementation of the ddmin algorithm
      def ddmin(circumstances, test):
          """Return a sublist of CIRCUMSTANCES that is a
             relevant configuration with respect to TEST."""

          assert test([]) == PASS
          assert test(circumstances) == FAIL

          n = 2     # Initial granularity

          while len(circumstances) >= 2:
              subsets = split(circumstances, n)
              assert len(subsets) == n

              some_complement_is_failing = 0
              for subset in subsets:
                  complement = listminus(circumstances, subset)

                  if test(complement) == FAIL:
                      circumstances = complement
                      n = max(n --- 1, 2)
                      some_complement_is_failing = 1
                      break

              if not some_complement_is_failing:
                  if n == len(circumstances):
                      break
                  n = min(n * 2, len(circumstances))

          return circumstances



      EXAMPLE 5.5: A PYTHON implementation of the split() function
      def split(circumstances, n):
          """Split a configuration CIRCUMSTANCES into N subsets;
             return the list of subsets"""

          subsets = []   # Result
          start = 0      # Start of next subset
          for i in range(0, n):
              len_subset = int((len(circumstances) - start) /
                                float(n --- i) + 0.5)
              subset = circumstances[start:start + len_subset]
              subsets.append(subset)
              start = start + len(subset)

          assert len(subsets) == n
          for s in subsets:
              assert len(s) > 0

          return subsets
                                           5.5 A Simpliﬁcation Algorithm   115




EXAMPLE 5.6: A PYTHON implementation of the listminus() function
def listminus(c1, c2):
    """Return all elements of C1 that are not in C2.
       Assumes elements of C1 are hashable."""

    # The hash map S2 has an entry for each element in C2
    s2 = {}
    for delta in c2:
        s2[delta] = 1

    # Check elements in C1 whether they are in S2
    c = []
    for delta in c1:
        if not s2.has_key(delta):
            c.append(delta)

    return c



EXAMPLE 5.7: A (simpliﬁed) PYTHON implementation of the test() function
def test(c):
    # Create Mozilla input file
    write_html(c, "input.html")

    parent = os.fork()
    if parent < 0:
        # fork() failed - no more processes
        sys.exit(1)

    elif not parent:
        # Invoke Mozilla
        # TODO: Replay user interaction, too
        os.execv("/usr/bin/mozilla",
                 ["mozilla", "input.html"])

    # Wait for Mozilla to complete
    childpid, status = os.waitpid(parent, 0)
    if os.WIFEXITED(status):
        exit_status = os.WEXITSTATUS(status)
        if exit_status == 0:
            return PASS      # Exited normally

    if os.WIFSIGNALED(status):
        caught_signal = os.WTERMSIG(status)
        if caught_signal == 11:
            # TODO: Check backtrace, too
            return FAIL     # Crashed w/ signal 11

    return UNRESOLVED
116   CHAPTER 5 Simplifying Problems



          The full-ﬂedged implementation (not listed here) additionally replays recorded
      user interaction to trigger the failure (see Chapter 4). It also instruments a debug-
      ger (see Chapter 8) to check the backtrace—the stack of functions active at the
      moment of the crash—and returns FAIL only if the found backtrace is identical to
      the backtrace of of the original failure—that is, the program crashes at the same
      place in the same way.
          What happens if we actually run this PYTHON implementation? Example 5.8
      shows all tests conducted by delta debugging. The initial tests are run as sketched
      in Section 5.4—cutting away large chunks of input ﬁrst, and smaller chunks later.
      At test 33, ddmin has actually reached the relevant input <SELECT>. The remaining
      tests demonstrate that every single character in <SELECT> is relevant for the failure
      to occur.


      EXAMPLE 5.8: Simplifying by characters

      Input:   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>            40 characters     
               <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>             0 characters     

       1   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>20
       2   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>20
       3   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>30
       4   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>30
       5   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>20
       6   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>20
       7   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>10
       8   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>10
       9   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>15
      10   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>15
      11   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>15
      12   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>10
      13   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>10
      14   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>10
      15   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>12
      16   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>13
      17   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>12
      18   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>13
      19   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>10
      20   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>10
      21   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>11
      22   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>10
      23   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7> 7
      24   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7> 8
      25   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7> 7
      26   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7> 8
      27   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7> 9
      28   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7> 9
      29   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7> 9
                                                 5.6 Simplifying User Interaction         117



30   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>9
31   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>8
32   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>9
33   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>8
34   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
35   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
36   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
37   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
38   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
39   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>6
40   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
41   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
42   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
43   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
44   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
45   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
46   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
47   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7
48   <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>7

                                 Result: <SELECT>



    This property—every remaining circumstance in c ⫽ ddmin(c ) being
relevant—is a general property of ddmin. Such a conﬁguration is called relevant
conﬁguration or a 1-minimal conﬁguration (see Deﬁnition A.11 in the Appendix
for details). It can be easily proven (see PropositionA.12 in theAppendix) that every
conﬁguration returned by ddmin is relevant because ddmin can return c only after
it tried removing every single element and the failure did not occur for any such
conﬁguration.
    One should note, though, that c is not necessarily the minimal conﬁguration
for which the failure still occurs. To ﬁnd that out, an algorithm would have to test
                                
every subset c —that is, 2|c | tests.




5.6 SIMPLIFYING USER INTERACTION
Delta debugging can be applied to all inputs,as described in Chapter 4. For instance,
one can use it to simplify user input—leaving only the relevant key strokes and
mouse movements in the script. This is especially useful if it is used anyway to
reproduce the failure, as in the case of the MOZILLA crash.
   To reproduce the failure, Zeller and Hildebrandt (2002) recorded 95 user events,
such as pressing keys or buttons and moving moving the mouse. Replaying these
95 events reproduced the they all necessary?
   Figure 5.2 shows the progress of ddmin applied to these 95 events.The (logarith-
mic) Y axis shows the number of events |c | left to be simpliﬁed; the (linear) X axis
118   CHAPTER 5 Simplifying Problems



                                   100
                                                                                          cfail




                   User interactions
                                       10




                                       1
                                            0   10   20   30      40     50     60   70     80    90
                                                               Tests executed

      FIGURE 5.2
      Simplifying MOZILLA user interactions. After 82 tests, ddmin has determined 3 events out of
      95 that are required to produce the failure: pressing Alt+P, pressing the mouse button, and
      releasing it again.


      shows the number of tests executed so far. After 82 tests, ddmin has simpliﬁed the
      user interaction to only three events:

         1. Press the P key while the Alt modiﬁer key is held. (Invoke the Print dialog.)
         2. Press the left mouse button on the Print button without a modiﬁer. (Arm the
            Print button.)
         3. Release the left mouse button. (Start printing.)
          Irrelevant user actions include moving the mouse pointer, selecting the Print
      to File option, altering the default ﬁle name, setting the print margins to .50, and
      releasing the P key before clicking on Print (all of this is irrelevant in producing
      the failure). (It is relevant, though, that the mouse button be pressed before it is
      released.)
          In addition to input in general, delta debugging can be applied to circum-
      stances as they occur during the program run or during the program development.
      Chapter 13 discusses how to generalize delta debugging to automatically ﬁnd actual
      causes in input, code changes, or schedules. Chapter 14 extends this to isolating
      cause–effect chains within program runs.



      5.7 RANDOM INPUT SIMPLIFIED
      Another application of automated simpliﬁcation is to use it in conjunction with
      random testing. The basic idea is to generate large random inputs that trigger a
      failure and then to simplify the input to reveal the relevant part.
          In a classical experiment, Miller et al. (1990) examined the robustness of UNIX
      utilities and services by sending them fuzz input—a large number of random
                                                               5.8 Simplifying Faster        119



characters. The studies showed that in the worst case 40 percent of the basic
programs crashed or went into inﬁnite loops when being fed with fuzz input.
    Zeller and Hildebrandt (2002) subjected a number of UNIX utilities to fuzz input
of up to a million characters until they until they showed a failure—and then used
ddmin to failure-inducing input.The ﬁrst group of programs showed obvious buffer
overrun problems:
   ■ FLEX (fast lexical analyzer generator), the most robust utility, crashed on
     sequences of 2,121 or more non–new line and non-NUL characters.
   ■ UL (underlining ﬁlter) crashed on sequences of 516 or more printable non–

     new line characters.
   ■ UNITS (convert quantities) crashed on sequences of 77 or more 8-bit cha-

     racters.
   The second group of programs appeared vulnerable to random commands:
   ■ The document formatters NROFF and TROFF crashed on malformed com-
     mands such as \DˆJ%0F and on 8-bit input such as Â (ASCII code 194).
   ■ CRTPLOT crashed on one-letter inputs t and f.


   All of these simpliﬁed test cases can directly be associated to a piece piece of
code that handles these inputs—and thus to the question.



5.8 SIMPLIFYING FASTER
As Zeller and Hildebrandt (2002) report,the number of tests required increased with
the length of the simpliﬁed input. Whereas the NROFF and TROFF tests typically
required about 100 to 200 test runs, the FLEX tests required 11,000 to 17,960 test
runs. Although a single test run need not take more than a few hundredths of a
second, this raises the question on how to reduce the number of test cases and to
improve the speed.
    As shown in Example 5.8, simplifying a conﬁguration c with ddmin requires
at least |c | tests, as every single circumstance in the resulting c must be tested
once. In the worst case, the number of tests can even be quadratic with respect
to |c |, resulting in a maximum number of tests t ⫽ (|c |2 ⫹ 7|c |)/2 (for details, see
Proposition A.13 in the Appendix). Although this is quite a pathological example,
we should strive to get simpliﬁcation done as quickly as possible.

5.8.1 Caching
The ddmin algorithm does not guarantee that each conﬁguration is tested only once.
Thus, our simple ddmin() implementation in Example 5.4 may invoke the test
function multiple times for the same conﬁguration. In Example 5.8, for instance,
the six tests runs 41–45 and 48 have been executed before. By using a cache to
store test outcomes, one could return the earlier test outcome whenever a test
is repeated.
120   CHAPTER 5 Simplifying Problems



      5.8.2 Stop Early
      Why does it take so long to simplify the FLEX input? Figure 5.3 shows the ﬁrst
      500 steps of the ddmin algorithm.You can easily see that the size quickly decreases,
      but after about 50 tests progress is very slow (and continues this way for the next
      10,500 tests).
         Normally, there is no need to try to squeeze the very last character out of an
      input. One can simply stop the simpliﬁcation process:
         ■ When a certain granularity has been reached (“We don’t care about removing
           single characters”).
         ■ When no progress has been made (“In the last 100 iterations, the size of the

           input has been reduced by 1 percent only”).
         ■ When a certain amount of time has elapsed (“One hour of automatic simpli-

           ﬁcation sufﬁces”).
      In the case of FLEX, any of these heuristics could stop minimization early.


      5.8.3 Syntactic Simpliﬁcation
      One effective way of speeding up simpliﬁcation is to simplify not by characters
      but by larger entities. As shown in Figure 5.1, simplifying the HTML input by lines
      requires but 12 tests to get down to a single line. And indeed, if only one circum-
      stance (i.e., one line) is failure-inducing it can be shown that ddmin is as efﬁcient
      as a binary search (see Proposition A.14 in the Appendix).
         This idea of grouping circumstances can be taken further by simplifying input
      not at the lexical level (i.e., characters, words, or lines) but at a syntactical level—
      that is, simplifying while preserving the syntactic structure of the input. The basic
      idea of syntactic simpliﬁcation is to turn the input into a tree (formally, a syntax


                                 1e+06
                                                                               cfail



                                100,000


                   Input size
                                 10,000



                                  1000
                                          0   50   100 150 200 250 300 350   400 450 500
                                                           Tests executed

      FIGURE 5.3
      Simplifying FLEX input. Initially, ddmin quickly decreases the size of the input, but then
      simplifying shows no signiﬁcant progress.
                                                                      5.8 Simplifying Faster   121




                                                0

                                              SELECT


                                   1            2                 3

                              NAME           MULTIPLE            SIZE

                             1.1                                3.1

                          "priority"                               7

FIGURE 5.4
An HTML tree. Simplifying such a tree structure rather than plain text yields better
performance.

tree) and to simplify the tree rather than the input string. An HTML or XML tree rep-
resenting our MOZILLA one-line example, for instance, would look like that shown
in Figure 5.4.
   To simplify such a tree, we make every node a circumstance. Our initial failing
conﬁguration thus contains six nodes rather than 40 characters. The test function
accepting a conﬁguration would remove missing nodes from the HTML tree (rather
than cutting away chunks of the input string) and create an HTML input from the
remaining tree and feed it to MOZILLA.
    However, what would test do if asked by ddmin to test an infeasible conﬁgu-
ration? In Figure 5.4, for instance, we cannot remove node 1, NAME, without also
removing its child node 1.1, "priority." Vice versa, HTML rules dictate that the
NAME attribute must have a value. The "priority" node is thus mandatory.
   To cope with such syntactic and semantic constraints, the test function should
be set up to simply return  (“unresolved”) whenever a conﬁguration is impossible
to achieve. That is, test does not run MOZILLA, but immediately returns  such that
ddmin selects the next alternative. Furthermore,the splitting of a conﬁguration into
subsets can be set up to take constraints into account—for by also keeping nodes
that are in the same subtree in the same subset.
    Figure 5.5 shows the tests actually carried out within the ddmin run. Our initial
conﬁguration is c ⫽ {0, 1, 1.1, 2, 3, 3.1}, standing for “all nodes are present.”
    ddmin tries the conﬁguration {2, 3, 3.1}, which is infeasible. Removing the sec-
ond half works and gets us c ⫽ {0, 1, 1.1}. In the next iteration, the conﬁguration
{1, 1.1} is infeasible, but {0} is ﬁne. ddmin is done, having required just two actual
tests to simplify the HTML input.

5.8.4 Isolate Differences, Not Circumstances
Instead of simplifying all circumstances,one can also simplify a difference between a
conﬁguration that works and a conﬁguration that fails. Example 5.9,which illustrates
this idea again shows two MOZILLA inputs:one that makes MOZILLA fail and one that
122   CHAPTER 5 Simplifying Problems



                    Test 1                         Test 2                    Test 3

                     0                             0                          0
                   SELECT                        SELECT                     SELECT
            1        2          3          1
          NAME     MULTIPLE    SIZE      NAME
         1.1                  3.1       1.1
      "priority"                7     "priority"
        <SELECT NAME="priority"        <SELECT NAME="priority">            <SELECT>
             MULTIPLE SIZE=7>

      FIGURE 5.5
      Simplifying an HTML tree in three steps.




      EXAMPLE 5.9: A failure-inducing difference. The initial < sign is isolated as the
      failure cause
      <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>              40 characters       
      <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>              39 characters       




      makes it pass. Neither of these two inputs is simpliﬁed. However,their difference has
      been simpliﬁed to just one character—the leading < sign. If the < sign is missing,
      MOZILLA interprets the input as ordinary text instead of as an HTML tag. Thus,
      whether the < is part of the input or not determines whether MOZILLA fails or not.
         Why would one want to simplify differences? There are two answers:
      1. Focusing. As we will see in Chapter 12,a difference between a conﬁguration that
         works and a conﬁguration that fails is a failure cause—and this failure cause is
         more precise the smaller the difference is. Thus, a small difference can pinpoint
         the problem cause in a common context.
            As an example of a common context, think about simplifying user interac-
         tions. Minimizing user interaction may still end up in 1,000 interactions or so, all
         required to set up the context in which the failure occurs. Isolating a difference,
         though, will reveal a (minimal) difference that decides the ﬁnal outcome:“If the
         user had not selected this option, the test would have passed.”
      2. Efﬁciency. Differences can be simpliﬁed faster than entire conﬁgurations. This
         is so because each passing test can be exploited to reduce the difference. Using
         minimization,only failing tests help in minimizing the conﬁguration. As an exam-
         ple of efﬁciency, an algorithm that isolates the single < difference requires only
         5 tests (compared to the 48 tests in Example 5.8).
         More on the isolation of failure causes automatically, as well as a discussion of
      the involved algorithms and techniques, can be found in Chapter 13.
                                                          5.11 Further Reading        123




5.9 CONCEPTS
The aim of simpliﬁcation is to create a simple test case from a detailed problem
report (Section 5.1).
   Simpliﬁed test cases (Section 5.2):
   ■ Are easier to communicate
   ■ Facilitate debugging
   ■ Identify duplicate problem reports


To simplify a test case, remove all irrelevant circumstances. A circumstance is irrel- How To
   evant if the problem occurs regardless of whether the circumstance is present
   or not (Section 5.3).
To automate simpliﬁcation, set up:
    ■ An automated test that checks whether the problem occurs
    ■ A strategy that determines the relevant circumstances

   One such strategy is the ddmin delta debugging algorithm (Section 5.4).
Circumstances to be simpliﬁed include not only the program input as data, but
   all circumstances that might affect the program’s outcome—for instance, user
   interactions (Section 5.6).
Simpliﬁcation can be combined with random testing to reveal the failure-inducing
   parts of the input.
To speed up automatic simpliﬁcation, employ one or more of the following:
    ■ Make use of caching

    ■ Stop early
    ■ Simplify at a syntactic or semantic level
    ■ Isolate failure-inducing differences rather than circumstances

These techniques are described in Section 5.8.



5.10 TOOLS
Delta Debugging. A full PYTHON implementation of ddmin is available at http://
  www.st.cs.uni-saarland.de/dd/.
Simpliﬁcation Library. Daniel S. Wilkerson of the University of California
   at Berkeley has another implementation of ddmin. This is found at http://
   freshmeat.net/projects/delta/.




5.11 FURTHER READING
Manual simpliﬁcation of test cases is a long-known programming (or debug-
ging) technique. I recommend Kernighan and Pike (1999) for anyone who wants
124   CHAPTER 5 Simplifying Problems



      further depth on the subject. McConnell (1993) also highlights the importance of
      simplifying a test case as the ﬁrst step in debugging.
          The principle of divide-and-conquer is often attributed to the Romans (divide et
      impera) as a governing principle. Its ﬁrst explicit usage as a political maxime was by
      the Florentine political philosopher Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527), denouncing
      the motto of Louis XI of France in dealing with his nobles.
          As far as I know, the work of Zeller and Hildebrandt (2002) was the ﬁrst gen-
      eral approach to automatic test case simpliﬁcation. Details on delta debugging
      applied to program input are listed. The article also includes a set of case studies,
      including an in-depth examination of the MOZILLA example. Ralf Hildebrandt and
      I had much fun conducting this research. I hope you’ll have some fun reading the
      article.
          Note that the ddmin algorithm as described in Zeller and Hildebrandt (2002)
      slightly differs from the version presented here. The “old” ddmin algorithm had
      an additional check whether one of the subsets ci would fail—that is, test(ci ) ⫽ 
      holds—and if so would reduce c to ci . This extra test has shown few beneﬁts in
      practice, which is why it is not included here.
          The Gecko BugAThon is still going on, and you can still contribute—auto-
      matically or manually. At the time of this writing, you would get a stuffed Firefox for
      every 15 bugs simpliﬁed. For details, have a look at https://developer.mozilla.org/
      en/Gecko_BugAThon.



      EXERCISES
      For some of the following exercises you need PYTHON or JAVA:
         ■ Using PYTHON, you can start immediately using the code examples in this
           chapter. PYTHON interpreters are available at http://www.python.org/.
         ■ Using JAVA, you can use the JAVA class in Example 5.10 as a starting point.

           All it needs are split() and listminus() functions as those deﬁned for
           PYTHON. The test() function is designed to be overloaded in a problem-
           speciﬁc subclass.
         ■ If you know neither PYTHON nor JAVA, adapt the code to a language of your

           choice.
      5.1 The function bool geegg(string s) returns
          ■ true if the string s contains three g characters or more, or
          ■ true if s contains two e characters or more, and
          ■ false otherwise.

          For instance, geegg("good eggs tomorrow") returns true,
          geegg("no eggs today") returns false.
             Apply the ddmin algorithm on the 16-character input
               a-debugging-exam
                                                  5.11 Further Reading   125




EXAMPLE 5.10: A delta debugging class in JAVA
import java.util.LinkedList;
import java.util.List;
import java.util.Iterator;

public class DD {
    // Outcome
    public static final int FAIL       = ---1;
    public static final int PASS       = +1;
    public static final int UNRESOLVED = 0;

    // Return a --- b
    public static List minus(List a, List b) { ... }

    // test function --- to be overloaded in subclasses
    public int test(List config) { return UNRESOLVED; }

    // Split C into N sublists
    public static List split(List c, int n) { ... }

    // ddmin algorithm
    // Return a sublist of CIRCUMSTANCES that is a relevant
    // configuration with respect to TEST.
    public List ddmin(List circumstances_) {
        List circumstances = circumstances_;

        assert test(new LinkedList()) == PASS;
        assert test(circumstances) == FAIL;

        int n = 2;

        while (circumstances.size() >= 2) {
            List subsets = split(circumstances, n);
            assert subsets.size() == n;

             boolean some_complement_is_failing = false;
             for (int i = 0; i < subsets.size(); i++) {
                 List subset = (List)subsets.get(i);
                 List complement = minus(circumstances, subset);

                 if (test(complement) == FAIL) {
                     circumstances = complement;
                     n = Math.max(n --- 1, 2);
                     some_complement_is_failing = true;
                     break;
                 }
             }

             if (!some_complement_is_failing) {
                 if (n == circumstances.size())
                     break;
126   CHAPTER 5 Simplifying Problems



                           n = Math.min(n * 2, circumstances.size());
                      }
                 }

                 return circumstances;
            }
       }




            to ﬁnd a 1-minimal input that still causes geegg() to return true. Record the
            individual inputs and test outcomes.
      5.2 As recent versions of MOZILLA tend to be much more stable,we shall simulate
          the “old” MOZILLA behavior using a test() function (Example 5.10).
          (a) Implement a PYTHON or JAVA test() function that accepts a list of char-
               acters. If the list contains the string <SELECT>, have it return FAIL, and
               PASS otherwise.
          (b) The version of test() in question (a) does not take extra attributes of
               SELECT into account. Have it return FAIL if the character list contains a
               substring that matches the regular expression <SELECT *[ˆ>]*> (that is,
               <SELECT followed by zero or more blank characters, followed by zero or
               more characters other than >, and ﬁnally followed by >).
      5.3 Use your test() function to minimize the problem report in Figure 3.1
          manually and systematically. How many executions of test() do you
          need?
      5.4   Using test(), split(),and listminus(),use your implementation of ddmin
            to simplify the problem report in Figure 3.1 automatically. If you simplify by
            lines, how many tests do you need?
      5.5 Repeat Exercise 5.4, simplifying the remaining line by characters.
      5.6   Repeat Exercise 5.4,simplifying syntactically. Use an XML parser to read in the
            HTML input. Use syntactic simpliﬁcation as sketched in Section 5.8.3.
      5.7   Design an input and a test() function such that ddmin requires a maximum
            of test runs. (Hint: See Zeller and Hildebrandt (2002) for the discussion of
            worst-case behavior.)
      5.8   Design a split() function for plain text that attempts to keep paragraphs,
            lines, and words together as long as possible.
      5.9 The ddmin algorithm only ﬁnds one possible 1-minimal input (i.e., an input
          where removing any single character makes the failure disappear). Sketch
                                                         5.11 Further Reading       127



      an extension of ddmin() that ﬁnds all possible 1-minimal inputs. Sketch its
      complexity.
5.10 Isolating a minimal failure-inducing difference using only a test() function
     has exponential complexity. Prove this claim.




   Perfection is achieved not when you have nothing more to add, but when
   there is nothing left to take away.
                                       – (attributed to) ANTOINE DE SAINT-EXUPÉRY
                                                                          CHAPTER


Scientiﬁc Debugging
                                                                             6
Once we have reproduced and simpliﬁed the problem, we must understand how
the failure came to be. The process of obtaining a theory that explains some aspect
of the universe is known as scientiﬁc method. It is also the appropriate process
for obtaining problem diagnostics. We introduce the basic techniques for creating
and verifying hypotheses, for making experiments, for conducting the process in a
systematic fashion, and for making the debugging process explicit.


6.1 HOW TO BECOME A DEBUGGING GURU
Some people are true debugging gurus. They look at the code and point their
ﬁnger at the screen and tell you: “Did you try X?” You try X and, voilà!, the failure is
gone. Such intuition comes from experience with earlier errors—one’s own errors
or other people’s errors—and the more experience you have the easier it is to
identify potential error causes and set up accurate hypotheses.Thus,the good news
is that you too will eventually become a debugging guru—if you live long enough
to suffer through all of the failures it takes to gather this experience.
    We can speed up this process by training our reasoning. How can we systemati-
cally ﬁnd out why a program fails? And how can we do so without vague concepts
of “intuition,”“sharp thinking,” and so on? What we want is a method of ﬁnding an
explanation for the failure—a method that:
   ■ Does not require a priori knowledge (that is, we need no experience from
     earlier errors).
   ■ Works in a systematic and reproducible fashion such that we can be sure to

     eventually ﬁnd the cause and reproduce it at will.
   The key question for this chapter is thus:

  HOW DO WE SYSTEMATICALLY FIND AN EXPLANATION FOR A FAILURE?




                                                                                           129
130   CHAPTER 6 Scientiﬁc Debugging




      6.2 THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD
      If a program fails, this behavior is initially just as surprising and inexplicable as any
      newly discovered aspect of the universe. Having a program fail also means that our
      abstraction fails. We can no longer rely on our model of the program, but rather
      must explore the program independently from the model. In other words, we must
      approach the failing program as if it were a natural phenomenon.
          In the natural sciences, there is an established method for developing or exam-
      ining a theory that explains (and eventually predicts) such an aspect. It is called
      scientiﬁc method because it is supposed to summarize the way (natural) scientists
      work when establishing some theory about the universe. In this very general form,
      the scientiﬁc method proceeds roughly as follows:

         1. Observe (or have someone else observe) some aspect of the universe.
         2. Invent a tentative description, called a hypothesis, that is consistent with the
            observation.
         3. Use the hypothesis to make predictions.
         4. Test those predictions by experiments or further observations and modify
            the hypothesis based on your results.
         5. Repeat steps 3 and 4 until there are no discrepancies between hypothesis and
            experiment and/or observation.

         When all discrepancies are gone, the hypothesis becomes a theory. In popular
      usage, a theory is just a synonym for a vague guess. For an experimental scientist,
      though, a theory is a conceptual framework that explains earlier observations and
      predicts future observations—for instance, a relativity theory or plate tectonics.
          In our context, we do not need the scientiﬁc method in its full glory, nor do we
      want to end up with grand uniﬁed theories for everything. We should be perfectly
      happy if we have a speciﬁc instance for ﬁnding the causes of program failures. In
      this debugging context, the scientiﬁc method operates as follows:
      1. Observe a failure (i.e., as described in the problem description).
      2. Invent a hypothesis as to the failure cause that is consistent with the observations.
      3. Use the hypothesis to make predictions.
      4. Test the hypothesis by experiments and further observations:
         ■ If the experiment satisﬁes the predictions, reﬁne the hypothesis.
         ■ If the experiment does not satisfy the predictions, create an alternate hypo-

           thesis.
      5. Repeat steps 3 and 4 until the hypothesis can no longer be reﬁned.
         The entire process is illustrated in Figure 6.1. Again, what you eventually get is a
      theory about how the failure came to be:
         ■ It explains earlier observations (including the failure).
                                                                     6.2 The Scientiﬁc Method   131



 Problem                  Program                          Failing                  Alternate
 description              code                             run                      runs

   MOZILLA 1.3                int main ( ){
   crashes when                    ...
   printing                   }




                                              Hypothesis


                                                <select>
                                                  tag?


                      Refine                                                Create new
                  hypothesis                                                hypothesis

                                               Prediction

                                                Printing
                                                <select>
                                               should fail!




                                              Experiment

                                          1. load <select>.
                                          2. click on “print”




                                          Observation 1
                 Hypothesis               conclusion                         Hypothesis
               is supported                                                  is rejected
                                          MOZILLA crashes




                                              Diagnosis                           Fix
                                              Line 397                         Line 392:
                                              in print.c:                      change p[i]
                                              pointer must                     to p[i21]
                                              not be NULL

FIGURE 6.1
The scientiﬁc method of debugging.
132   CHAPTER 6 Scientiﬁc Debugging



         ■ It predicts future observations (for instance, that the failure no longer appears
           after applying a ﬁx).
      In our context, such a theory is called a diagnosis.



      6.3 APPLYING THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD
      How is the scientiﬁc method used in practice?As an example in this chapter,consider
      the sample program as discussed in Chapter 1. The sample program is supposed
      to sort its command-line arguments, but some defect causes it to fail under certain
      circumstances.
         $ sample 11 14
         Output: 0 11
         $ _
          In Section 1.4 we saw how to ﬁnd the defect in the sample program—but in a
      rather ad hoc or unsystematic way. Let’s now retell this debugging story using the
      concepts of scientiﬁc method.

      6.3.1 Debugging sample—Preparation
      We start with writing down the problem:what happened in the failing run and how
      it failed to meet our expectations.This easily ﬁts within the scientiﬁc method scheme
      by setting up an initial hypothesis,“the program works,” which is then rejected.This
      way, we have observed the failure, which is the ﬁrst step in the scientiﬁc method.
         ■ Hypothesis: The sample program works.
         ■ Prediction: The output of sample 11 14 is "11 14."
         ■ Experiment: We run sample as previously.
         ■ Observation: The output of sample 11 14 is "0 11."
         ■ Conclusion: The hypothesis is rejected.


      6.3.2 Debugging sample—Hypothesis 1
      We begin with a little veriﬁcation step: Is the zero value reported by sample caused
      by a zero value in the program state? Looking at Example 1.1, lines 38–41, it should
      be obvious that the ﬁrst value printed (0) should be the value of a[0]. It is unlikely
      that this output code has a defect. Nonetheless, if it does we can spend hours and
      hours on the wrong trail. Therefore, we set up the hypothesis that a[0] is actually
      zero:
         ■ Hypothesis: The execution causes a[0] to be zero.
         ■ Prediction: a[0] = 0 should hold at line 37.
         ■ Experiment: Using a debugger, observe a[0] at line 37.
         ■ Observation: a[0] = 0 holds as predicted.
         ■ Conclusion: The hypothesis is conﬁrmed.

      (What does “using a debugger” mean in practice? See Section 8.3.1 to ﬁnd out.)
                                            6.3 Applying the Scientiﬁc Method          133



6.3.3 Debugging sample—Hypothesis 2
Now we must determine where the infection in a[0] comes from. We assume that
shell_sort() causes the infection:
   ■ Hypothesis: The infection does not take place until shell_sort().
   ■ Prediction: The state should be sane at the beginning of shell_sort()—that
     is, a[] = [11, 14] and size = 2 should hold at line 6.
   ■ Experiment: Observe a[] and size.
   ■ Observation: We ﬁnd that a[] = [11, 14, 0], size = 3 holds.
   ■ Conclusion: The hypothesis is rejected.



6.3.4 Debugging sample—Hypothesis 3
Assuming we have only one infection site, the infection does not take place within
shell_sort(). Instead, shell_sort() gets bad arguments. We assume that these
arguments cause the failure:
   ■ Hypothesis: Invocation of shell_sort() with size = 3 causes the failure.
   ■ Prediction: If we correct size manually, the run should be successful—the
     output should be "11 14."
   ■ Experiment: Using a debugger, we:

     1. Stop execution at shell_sort() (line 6).
     2. Set size from 3 to 2.
     3. Resume execution.
   ■ Observation: As predicted.

   ■ Conclusion: The hypothesis is conﬁrmed.



6.3.5 Debugging sample—Hypothesis 4
The value of size can only come from the invocation of shell_sort() in line 36—
that is, the argc argument. As argc is the size of the array plus 1, we change the
invocation.
   ■ Hypothesis: Invocation of shell_sort() with size = argc (instead of
     size = argc — 1) causes the failure.
   ■ Prediction: If we change argc to argc — 1, the “Changing argc to argc 1”

     run should be successful. That is, the output should be "11 14."
   ■ Experiment: In line 36, change argc to argc — 1 and recompile.
   ■ Observation: As predicted.
   ■ Conclusion: The hypothesis is conﬁrmed.


    After four iterations of the scientiﬁc method, we have ﬁnally reﬁned our hypoth-
esis to a theory; the diagnosis “Invocation of shell_sort() with argc causes the
failure.” We have proven this by showing the two alternatives:
   ■   With the invocation argc, the failure occurs.
   ■   With the invocation argc — 1, the failure no longer occurs.
134   CHAPTER 6 Scientiﬁc Debugging



      Thus, we have shown that the invocation with argc caused the failure. As a side
      effect, we have generated a ﬁx—namely, replacing argc with argc — 1 in line 36.
          Note that we have not yet shown that the change induces correctness—that is,
      sample may still contain other defects. In particular, in programs more complex
      than sample we would now have to validate that this ﬁx does not introduce new
      problems (Chapter 15 has more on this issue). In the case of sample, though, you
      can do such a validation by referring to a higher authority: Being the author of
      this book, I claim that with the ﬁx applied there is no way sample could ever sort
      incorrectly. Take my word.



      6.4 EXPLICIT DEBUGGING
      In Section 6.3 we saw how to use the scientiﬁc method to establish the failure cause.
      You may have noticed that the process steps were quite explicit: We explicitly
      stated the hypotheses we were examining, and we explicitly set up experiments
      that supported or rejected the hypotheses.
          Being explicit is an important means toward understanding the problem at hand,
      starting with the problem statement. Every time you encounter a problem, write
      it down or tell it to a friend. Just stating the problem in whatever way makes you
      rethink your assumptions—and often reveals the essential clues to the solution.The
      following is an amusing implementation,as reported by Kernighan and Pike (1999):
         One university center kept a Teddy bear near the help desk. Students with
         mysterious bugs were required to explain them to the bear before they could
         speak to a human counselor.

          Unfortunately, most programmers are implicit about the problem statement, and
      even more so within the debugging process (they keep everything in their mind).
      But this is a dangerous thing to do. As an analogy, consider a Mastermind-game
      (Figure 6.2). Your opponent has chosen a secret code, and you have a number of
      guesses. For each guess, your opponent tells you the number of tokens in your
      guess that had the right color or were in the right position. If you have ever played
      Mastermind and won, you have probably applied the scientiﬁc method.
          However,as you may recall from your Mastermind experiences,you must remem-
      ber all earlier experiments and their outcomes, in that this way you can keep track
      of all conﬁrmed and rejected hypotheses. In a Mastermind game, this is easy, as the
      guesses and their outcomes are recorded on the board. In debugging, though, many
      programmers do not explicitly keep track of experiments and outcomes, which is
      equivalent to playing Mastermind in memory. In fact, forcing yourself to remem-
      ber all experiments and outcomes prevents you from going to sleep until the bug is
      eventually ﬁxed. Debugging this way, a “mastermind” is not enough—you also need
      a “master memory.”
                                                        6.5 Keeping a Logbook         135




FIGURE 6.2
A Mastermind game.




6.5 KEEPING A LOGBOOK
A straightforward way of making debugging explicit and relieving memory stress
is to write down all hypotheses and observations—that is, keep a logbook. Such a
logbook can be either on paper or in some electronic form. Keeping a logbook may
appear cumbersome at ﬁrst, but with a well-kept logbook you do not have to keep
all experiments and outcomes in memory. You can always quit work and resume
the next day.
    In Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, Robert M. Pirsig writes about
the virtue of a logbook in cycle maintenance:
   Everything gets written down, formally, so that you know at all times where
   you are, where you’ve been, where you’re going, and where you want to get. In
   scientiﬁc work and electronics technology this is necessary because otherwise
   the problems get so complex you get lost in them and confused and forget what
   you know and what you don’t know and have to give up.

   And beware—this quote applies to motorcycle maintenance. Real programs
are typically much more complex than motorcycles. For a motorcycle maintainer,
it would probably appear amazing that people would debug programs without
keeping logbooks.
   And how should a logbook be kept? Unless you want to share your logbook
with someone else, feel free to use any format you like. However, your notes should
include the following points, as applied in Section 6.3:
136   CHAPTER 6 Scientiﬁc Debugging



         ■ Statement of the problem (a problem report, as in Chapter 2, or, easier,
           a report identiﬁer)
         ■ Hypotheses as to the cause of the problem
         ■ Predictions of the hypotheses
         ■ Experiments designed to test the predictions
         ■ Observed results of the experiments
         ■ Conclusions from the results of the experiments


         An example of such a logbook is shown in Figure 6.3, recapitulating hypo-
      theses 2 and 3 from Section 6.3. Again, quoting Robert Pirsig:
         This is similar to the formal arrangement of many college and high-school lab
         notebooks, but the purpose here is no longer just busywork.The purpose now
         is precise guidance of thoughts that will fail if they are not accurate.



      Hypothesis         Prediction          Experiment       Observation        Conclusion

      Infection in       At shell_sort()     Observe a[]      a[] = [11,14,0] rejected
      shell_sort()       (Line 6), expect    and size[]       and size = 3
                         a[] = [11, 14]
                         and size = 2


      Invocation of      Setting size = 2    Set size = 2    As predicted        conﬁrmed
      shell_sort()       should make         using
      with size = 3      sample work         debugger
      causes failure


      FIGURE 6.3
      A debugging logbook (excerpt).




      6.6 DEBUGGING QUICK-AND-DIRTY
      Not every problem needs the full strength of the scientiﬁc method or the formal
      content of a logbook. Simple problems should be solved in a simple manner—
      without going through the explicit process. If we ﬁnd a problem we suppose to
      be simple, the gambler in us will head for the lighter process. Why bother with
      formalities? Just think hard and solve the problem.
         The problem with such an implicit “quick-and-dirty” process is to know when
      to use it. It is not always easy to tell in advance whether a problem is simple or
      not. Therefore, it is useful to set up a time limit. If after 10 minutes of quick-and-
      dirty debugging you still have not found the defect, go for the scientiﬁc method
      instead and write down the problem statement in the logbook. Then, straighten out
                                                     6.7 Algorithmic Debugging          137



your head by making everything formal and exact—and feel free to take a break
whenever necessary.



6.7 ALGORITHMIC DEBUGGING
Another way of organizing the debugging process is to automate it—at least par-
tially. The idea of algorithmic debugging (also called declarative debugging) is to
have a tool that guides the user along the debugging process interactively. It does
so by asking the user about possible infection sources:
   1. Assume an incorrect result R has the origins O1 , O2 , . . . , On .
   2. For each of the origins Oi , algorithmic debugging inquires whether the
      origin Oi is correct or not.
   3. If one of the origins Oi is incorrect, algorithmic debugging restarts at step 1
      with R  Oi .
   4. Otherwise, all origins Oi are correct. Then, the infection must have origi-
      nated at the place where R was computed from the origins. The process
      terminates.
     Let’s illustrate algorithmic debugging via an example. Example 6.1 shows a
PYTHON sorting function: sort(L) is supposed to return a sorted copy of the
list L. Unfortunately, sort() does not work properly: sort([2, 1, 3]) returns
[3, 1, 2] rather than [1, 2, 3].



EXAMPLE 6.1: A buggy insertion sort program
 def insert(elem, list):
     """Return a copy of LIST with ELEM sorted in"""
     if len(list) == 0:
         return [elem]

      head = list[0]
      tail = list[1:]
      if elem <= head:
          return list + [elem]

      return [head] + insert(elem, tail)

 def sort(list):
     """Return a sorted copy of LIST"""
     if len(list) <= 1:
         return list

      head = list[0]
      tail = list[1:]
      return insert(head, sort(tail))
138   CHAPTER 6 Scientiﬁc Debugging



                                             Sort([2, 1, 3])=[3 ,1, 2]



                          Sort([1, 3])=[3, 1]                       Insert(2, [3, 1])=[3, 1, 2]



         Sort([3])=[3]                        Insert(1, [3])=[3, 1]


      FIGURE 6.4
      Execution tree of the sorting function in Example 6.1. Each computation of a function (top)
      relies on further function calls (bottom).


         Our sort() function is based on insertion sort. It thus relies on a function
      insert(X, L), which returns a list where X is inserted between the elements of L:
      insert(2, [1, 3]) should return [1, 2, 3].
         Figure 6.4 summarizes the execution of sort([2, 1, 3]) (a line stands for
      functions being invoked). Each invocation of sort(L) ﬁrst calls itself for the tail of L
      and then calls insert() to insert the ﬁrst element of L into the freshly sorted list.
         The execution tree shown in Figure 6.4 now becomes the base for the algorithmic
      debugging process. Assume we have a tool that implements algorithmic debugging
      for PYTHON, working on the console. Such a tool would ﬁrst ask us whether the
      end result is correct, which we decline.
          sort([2, 1, 3]) = [3, 1, 2]? no

         The error can originate either from sort([1, 3]) or the subsequent insert()
      call. Algorithmic debugging starts querying about the ﬁrst origin.
          sort([1, 3]) = [3, 1]? no

      Again, the error could originate from the earlier sort([3]) call. Is the result
      correct?
          sort([3]) = [3]? yes

      Because the call sort([3]) = [3] was ﬁne but sort([1, 3]) = [3, 1] is
      wrong,the error could have originated in the insert() call. It actually does,because
      insert(1, [3]) should return [1, 3], and not [3, 1].
          insert(1, [3]) = [3, 1]? no

         Because insert(1, [3]) invokes no further functions, we have isolated the
      defect. The infection originates at the call insert(1, [3]) = [3, 1] (shown in
      gray in the ﬁgure). Our algorithmic debugging tool reports:
          An error has been localized in the body of insert().

         We can even narrow down the infection to the code executing in the call
      insert(1, [3]). This leaves us with the return statement:
                                                      6.7 Algorithmic Debugging          139



   if elem <= head:
       return list + [elem]
   This statement is wrong. If the element to be inserted is smaller than the head of
the list, it should be inserted at the beginning rather than at the end. The statement
thus must read:
   if elem <= head:
       return [elem] + list
This ﬁxes the sort() function from Example 6.1. With this ﬁx applied, it sorts just
ﬁne.
   The general idea of having an algorithm drive the debugging process is applicable
to arbitrary debugging techniques. Wherever we search an error—and need to rely
on human input to decide what is correct, right, or true—algorithmic debugging
can drive the search in a systematic way. Unfortunately, algorithmic debugging has
not been demonstrated to be effective for real-world applications:

The process does not scale. In a large imperative program, there are millions and
  millions of functions being executed. Many of these functions communicate via
  shared data structures, rather than simple arguments and returned values. Worse
  yet, the data structures being accessed are far too huge to be checked manually.
  Imagine debugging a compiler:“Are these 4 megabytes of executable code correct
  (yes/no)?”
       For these reasons,algorithmic debugging works best for functional and logical
  programming languages. Functional and logical programs have few or no side
  effects—that is, there is no shared state that is updated, and the user does not
  have to check the entire program state. For logical languages such as PROLOG, an
  execution tree (Figure 6.4) becomes a proof tree, which is part of every program
  execution.
Programmers prefer driving to being driven. The algorithmic debugging process,
  as implemented in early tools, is extremely rigid. Many programmers do not like
  being instrumented in such a mechanical way. Making the process user friendly
  in the sense that it provides assistance to programmers (rather than having the
  programmer assist the tool) is an open research issue.
      It is conceivable that future tools, combined with the analysis techniques
  deﬁned in this book, will provide guidance to the programmer by asking the
  right questions. In particular, one can think of programmers providing speciﬁca-
  tions of particular function properties—speciﬁcations that can then be reused for
  narrowing down the incorrect part.

   All of these problems disappear if we replace the programmer being queried
by an oracle—an automatic device that tells correctness from noncorrectness. To
determine its result, such an oracle would use an external speciﬁcation. In this
book, however, we assume that there is no such speciﬁcation (except from the ﬁnal
140   CHAPTER 6 Scientiﬁc Debugging



      test outcome)—at least not in a form a mechanical device could make use of it.
      Therefore, scientiﬁc method still needs human interaction.



      6.8 DERIVING A HYPOTHESIS
      Scientiﬁc method gives us a general process for turning a hypothesis into a theory—
      or,more speciﬁcally,an initial guess into a diagnosis. But still,within each iteration of
      the scientiﬁc method we must come up with a new hypothesis. This is the creative
      part of debugging: thinking about the many ways a failure could have come to be.
      This creative part is more than just mechanically enumerating possible origins, as in
      algorithmic debugging.
         Unfortunately, being creative is not enough: We must also be effective. The
      better our hypotheses, the less iterations we need, and the faster the diagnosis is
      done. To be effective, we need to leverage as many knowledge sources as possible.
      These are the ingredients of debugging, as shown in Figure 6.1.

      6.8.1 The Description of the Problem
      Without a concise description of the problem, you will not be able to tell whether
      the problem is solved or not.A simpliﬁed problem report also helps. In Chapter 2 we
      saw examples of such descriptions, and discussed the issues of tracking problems.
      Chapter 5 provided details on the simpliﬁcation of problem reports.

      6.8.2 The Program Code
      The program code is the common abstraction across all possible program runs,
      including the failing run. It is the basis for almost all debugging techniques.
          Without knowledge about the internals of the program, you can only observe
      concrete runs (if any) without ever referring to the common abstraction. Lack of
      program code makes understanding (and thus debugging) much more difﬁcult. As
      you cannot recreate the program from code, you must work around defects, which
      is far less satisfactory than ﬁxing the code itself.
          As an example, consider the sort() algorithmic debugging session in
      Section 6.7. In principle, we (as users) could have run the session without knowing
      the source code. To determine whether a result is correct or not, all we need is a
      speciﬁcation. However,the tool itself must have access to the code (Example 6.1) in
      order to trace and instrument the individual function calls. Chapter 7 discusses tech-
      niques for reasoning from the (abstract) program code to the (concrete) program
      run—including the failing run.

      6.8.3 The Failing Run
      The program code allows you to speculate about what may be going on in a concrete
      failing run. If you actually execute the program such that the problem is reproduced,
                                                        6.8 Deriving a Hypothesis         141



you can observe actual facts about the concrete run. Such facts include the code
being executed and the program state as it evolves. These observation techniques
are the bread and butter of debugging.
   Again, debugging the sort() code in Example 6.1 becomes much easier once
one can talk about a concrete (failing) run. In principle,one could do without obser-
vation. This is ﬁne for proving abstract properties but bad for debugging concrete
problems.
    Chapter 8 discusses techniques with which programmers can observe concrete
runs. Chapter 10 extends these techniques to have the computer detect violations
automatically.

6.8.4 Alternate Runs
A single run of a nontrivial program contains a great deal of information, and thus
we need a means of focusing on speciﬁc aspects of the execution. In debugging,we
are most interested in anomalies—those aspects of the failing run that differ from
“normal” passing runs. For this purpose, we must know which “normal” runs exist,
what their common features are, and how these differ in the failing run.
    In the sort() example, algorithmic debugging has used alternate runs of indi-
vidual functions to narrow down the defect. From the fact that sort([3]) worked,
and sort([1, 3]) failed, algorithmic debugging could deduce that the error must
have originated in the insert() call taking place between the two sort() calls.
    In practice, we seldom have a speciﬁcation available to tell us whether some
aspect of a run is correct or not. Yet, with a sufﬁcient number of alternate runs we
can classify what is “normal”or not. Chapter 11 discusses automated techniques for
detecting and expressing commonalities and anomalies across multiple runs.

6.8.5 Earlier Hypotheses
Depending on the outcome of a scientiﬁc method experiment, one must either
reﬁne or reject a hypothesis. In fact, every new hypothesis must
   ■ include all earlier hypotheses that passed (the predictions of which were
     satisﬁed), and
   ■ exclude all hypotheses that failed (the predictions of which were not satisﬁed).


Any new hypothesis must also explain all earlier observations, regardless of whether
the experiment succeeded or failed—and it should be different enough from earlier
hypotheses to quickly advance toward the target. Again, the algorithmic debugging
session is a straightforward example of how the results of earlier tests (i.e., answers
given by the user) drive the scientiﬁc method and thus the debugging process. The
ﬁnal diagnosis of insert() having a defect ﬁts all passed hypotheses and explains
all earlier observations.
    To automate the process, we would like to reuse earlier hypotheses without
asking the user for assistance. If a hypothesis is about a cause (such as a failure
142   CHAPTER 6 Scientiﬁc Debugging



      cause),the search for the actual cause can be conducted systematically by narrowing
      the difference between a passing and a failing scenario. These techniques can
      be automated and applied to program runs. Chapter 13 discusses automating the
      search for failure-inducing circumstances. Chapter 14 does the same for program
      states.



      6.9 REASONING ABOUT PROGRAMS
      Depending on the ingredients that come into play, humans use different reasoning
      techniques to learn about programs. These techniques form a hierarchy, as shown
      in Figure 6.5.
      Deduction. Deduction is reasoning from the general to the particular. It lies at the
        core of all reasoning techniques. In program analysis, deduction is used for
        reasoning from the program code (or other abstractions) to concrete runs—
        especially for deducing what can or cannot happen. These deductions take the
        form of mathematical proofs. If the abstraction is true, so are the deduced



                                           Experimentation
                                            n controlled runs


                                                     Uses


                                               Induction
                                                 n runs


                                                     Uses


                                              Observation
                                                 1 run


                                                     Uses


                                               Deduction
                                                 0 runs


      FIGURE 6.5
      A hierarchy of program analysis techniques.
                                                6.9 Reasoning About Programs            143



   properties. Because deduction does not require any knowledge about the
   concrete, it is not required that the program in question actually be executed.
      In this book,we call any technique static analysis if it infers ﬁndings without
   executing the program—that is, the technique is based on deduction alone. In
   contrast, dynamic analysis techniques use actual executions.
       As Nethercote (2004) points out, this distinction of whether a program is
   executed or not may be misleading. In particular, this raises the issue of what
   exactly is meant by “execution.” Instead, he suggests that static techniques
   predict approximations of a program’s future; dynamic analysis remembers
   approximations of a program’s past. Because in debugging we are typically
   concerned about the past, most interesting debugging techniques fall into the
   “dynamic” categories, which we discuss next.
Observation. Observation allows the programmer to inspect arbitrary aspects of
  an individual program run. Because an actual run is required, the associated
  techniques are called dynamic. Observation brings in actual facts of a pro-
  gram execution. Unless the observation process is ﬂawed, these facts cannot be
  denied.
      In this book, we call a technique observational if it generates ﬁndings or
  approximations from a single execution of the program. Most observational
  techniques make use of the program code in some form or another and thus also
  rely on deduction.
Induction. Induction is reasoning from the particular to the general. In program
   analysis,induction is used to summarize multiple program runs (e.g.,a test suite
   or random testing) to some abstraction that holds for all considered program
   runs. In this context, a “program” may also be a piece of code that is invoked
   multiple times from within a program—that is, some function or loop body.
       In this book, we call a technique inductive if it generates ﬁndings from mul-
   tiple executions of the program. By deﬁnition, every inductive technique makes
   use of observation.
Experimentation. Searching for the cause of a failure using scientiﬁc method
   requires a series of experiments,reﬁning and rejecting hypotheses until a precise
   diagnosis is isolated. This implies multiple program runs that are controlled by
   the reasoning process.
      In this book, we call a technique experimental if it generates ﬁndings from
   multiple executions of the program that are controlled by the technique. By
   deﬁnition, every experimental technique uses induction and thus observation.

   In the following chapters, we examine the most important of these techniques.
We start with Chapter 7, deducing hypotheses from the program code without
actually executing the program. Chapters 8–10 focus on observational techniques.
Chapter 11 discusses inductive techniques. Finally, Chapters 13 and 14 introduce
experimental techniques.
 144      CHAPTER 6 Scientiﬁc Debugging




          6.10 CONCEPTS
How To To isolate a failure cause, use scientiﬁc method (Section 6.2):
          1. Observe a failure (i.e., as described in the problem description).
          2. Invent a hypothesis as to the failure cause that is consistent with the obser-
              vations.
          3. Use the hypothesis to make predictions.
          4. Test the hypothesis by experiments and further observations:
              ■ If the experiment satisﬁes the predictions, reﬁne the hypothesis.
              ■ If the experiment does not satisfy the predictions, create an alternate

                hypothesis.
          5. Repeat steps 3 and 4 until the hypothesis can no longer be reﬁned.
          To understand the problem at hand, make it explicit. Write it down or talk to a
             friend (Section 6.4).
          To avoid endless debugging sessions, make the individual steps explicit. Keep a
             logbook (Section 6.5).
          To locate an error in a functional or logical program, consider algorithmic
             debugging.
          Algorithmic debugging drives the debugging process by proposing hypotheses
             about error origins, which the user (or some oracle) must individually judge.
          To debug quick-and-dirty, think hard and solve the problem—but as soon you
             exceed some time limit go the formal way (Section 6.6).
          To derive a hypothesis, consider:
              ■ The problem description
              ■ The program code
              ■ The failing run
              ■ Alternate runs
              ■ Earlier hypotheses

             See Section 6.8 for details.
          To reason about programs, one can use four different techniques:
              ■ Deduction (zero runs)
              ■ Observation (one single run)
              ■ Induction (multiple runs)
              ■ Experimentation (multiple controlled runs)

          All of these are discussed in further chapters.



          6.11 FURTHER READING
          Algorithmic debugging as a semiautomation of scientiﬁc method was conceived
          by Shapiro (1982) for logical programming languages such as PROLOG. In 1992,
                                                            6.11 Further Reading         145



Fritzson et al. extended the approach to imperative languages,using program slicing
(see Section 7.4 in Chapter 7) to determine data dependences, and demonstrated
the feasibility on a subset of PASCAL. The algorithmic debugging example session
is based on Fritzson et al. (1992). In 1997, Naish generalized algorithmic debugging
to the more general concept of declarative debugging.
    Whereas the scientiﬁc method is the basis of all experimental science, it is
rarely discussed or used in computer science. The reason is that computer sci-
ence is concerned with artifacts, which are supposed to be fully under control
and fully understood. However, as an unexpected failure occurs the artifact must
be explored just like some natural phenomenon. For an early but still excellent
book on experimental and statistical methods for data reduction, see An Intro-
duction to Scientiﬁc Research by Wilson (1952). A more general book from the
same period that remains useful today is The Art of Scientiﬁc Investigation by
Beveridge (1957).
    For philosophy of science, the undisputed classic is the work of Popper (1959),
who coined the term falsiﬁability as the characteristic method of scientiﬁc inves-
tigation and inference. For Popper, any theory is scientiﬁc only if it is refutable
by a conceivable event, which is why experiments play such a role in obtaining
diagnoses.
    The deﬁnitions of cause and effect in this book are called based on counterfac-
tuals, because they rely on assumptions about nonfacts. The ﬁrst counterfactual
deﬁnition of causes and effects is attributed to Hume (1748): “If the ﬁrst object
[the cause] had not been, the second [the effect] never had existed.” The best-
known counterfactual theory of causation was elaborated by Lewis (1973), reﬁned
in 1986.
    Causality is a vividly discussed philosophical ﬁeld. Other than the counterfactual
deﬁnitions, the most important alternatives are deﬁnitions based on regularity and
probabilism. I recommend Zalta (2002) for a survey.



EXERCISES
6.1 “We have reached a state where many programs are just as unpredictable as
    natural phenomena.” Discuss.
6.2 Using the logbook format (Section 6.5), describe the individual steps of the
    algorithmic debugging run in Section 6.7. Which are the hypotheses, predic-
    tions, and experiments?
6.3 Simpliﬁcation of tests, as discussed in Chapter 5, can be seen as an application
    of the scientiﬁc method. What are the hypotheses,predictions,and tests being
    used?
6.4   Set up a logbook form sheet with entries such as “Prediction,”“Observation,”
      and so on such that programmers only need to ﬁll in the gaps. Give them to
      piers and collect their opinions.
146   CHAPTER 6 Scientiﬁc Debugging



      6.5 “I want to archive logbook entries, such that in case a similar problem occurs
          I may ﬁnd hints on which hypotheses to use and which experiments to
          conduct.” Discuss.




       How do they know the load limit on bridges, Dad?
       They drive bigger and bigger trucks over the bridge until it breaks.
       Then they weigh the last truck and rebuild the bridge.
                                                                       – BILL WATTERSON
                                                             Calvin and Hobbes (1997)
                                                                        CHAPTER


Deducing Errors
                                                                          7
In this chapter, we begin exploring the techniques for creating hypotheses intro-
duced in Chapter 6. We start with deduction techniques—reasoning from the
abstract program code to the concrete program run. In particular, we present pro-
gram slicing, an automated means of determing possible origins of a variable value.
Using program slicing, one can effectively narrow down the number of possible
infection sites.



7.1 ISOLATING VALUE ORIGINS
Oops! We have observed something that should not happen—the program has
reached some state it never should have reached. How did it get into this state?
Kernighan and Pike (1999) give a hint:
   Something impossible occurred, and the only solid information is that it really
   did occur. So we must think backwards from the result to discover the reasons.

    What does “thinking backwards” mean here? One of the main applications of
program code during debugging is to identify relevant statements that could have
caused the failure—and, in the same step, to identify the irrelevant statements that
could not have caused the failure in any way.This allows the programmer to neglect
the irrelevant statements—and to focus on the relevant ones instead.These relevant
statements are found by following back the possible origins of the result—that is,
“thinking backward.”As an example of relevant and irrelevant statements, consider
the following piece of BASIC code.
   10 INPUT X
   20 Y = 0
   30 X = Y
   40 PRINT "X = ", X
This piece of code outputs the value of X, which is always a zero value. Where does
this value come from? We can trace our way backward from the printing statement
in line 40 and ﬁnd that X’s value was assigned from Y (line 30), which in turn got
its zero value in line 20. The input to X in line 10 (and anything else that might be
inserted before line 20) is irrelevant for the value of X in line 40.                   147
148   CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors



         Applying this relevant/irrelevant scheme, we can effectively narrow down our
      search space—simply by focusing on the relevant values and neglecting the irrele-
      vant ones. This is shown in Figure 1.5. During the execution of a program, only a
      few values (marked with ) can possibly inﬂuence the failing state. Knowing these
      relevant values can be crucial for effective debugging.
          How does one determine whether a value (or a statement that generates this
      value) is relevant for a failure or not? To do so, we need not execute the program.
      We can do so by pure deduction—that is, reasoning from the abstract (program
      code) to what might happen in the concrete (run). By deducing from the code, we
      can abstract over all (or at least several) runs to determine properties that hold
      for all runs (for instance, properties about relevant and irrelevant values). The key
      question is:

        WHAT GENERAL ERRORS CAN WE DEDUCE FROM CODE ALONE?




      7.2 UNDERSTANDING CONTROL FLOW
      Deducing from program code is more than just sitting in front of the code and trying
      to understand it. A few basic principles can effectively guide the search for relevant
      values—and incidentally, these principles are the same for seasoned programmers
      as for automated analysis tools.
          As an ongoing example, consider the fibo.c program shown in Example 7.1.
      This program displays the ﬁrst nine members of the Fibonacci sequence 1, 1, 2,
      3, 5, 8, . . . , in which each element is the sum of its two predecessors. Formally, the
      nth element of the Fibonacci sequence is deﬁned as
                                  
                                   1                         for n ⫽ 0 ∨ n ⫽ 1
                        ﬁb(n) ⫽
                                  ﬁb(n ⫺ 1) ⫹ ﬁb(n ⫺ 2)      otherwise.

         Unfortunately, the implementation in Example 7.1 has a defect. Its output is:
          $ gcc -o fibo fibo.c
          $ ./fibo
          fib(9)=55
          fib(8)=34
          fib(7)=21
          fib(6)=13
          fib(5)=8
          fib(4)=5
          fib(3)=3
          fib(2)=2
          fib(1)=134513905
          $ _
         As we see, the value of fib(1) is wrong. fib(1) should be 1 instead of the
      arbitrary value reported here.
                                               7.2 Understanding Control Flow          149




EXAMPLE 7.1: fibo.c prints out Fibonacci numbers—except for 1
 1    /* fibo.c -- Fibonacci C program to be debugged */
 2
 3    #include <stdio.h>
 4
 5    int fib(int n)
 6    {
 7        int f, f0 = 1, f1 = 1;
 8
 9        while (n > 1) {
10             n = n --- 1;
11            f = f0 + f1;
12            f0 = f1;
13            f1 = f;
14        }
15
16        return f;
17    }
18
19    int main()
20    {
21        int n = 9;
22
23        while (n > 0)
24        {
25            printf("fib(%d)=%dN", n, fib(n));
26            n = n --- 1;
27        }
28
29        return 0;
30    }


    How does the bad return value of fib(1) come to be? As an experienced pro-
grammer, you can probably identify the problem in half a minute or less (just read
the source code in Example 7.1). Let’s try, though, to do this in a little more sys-
tematic fashion—after all, we want our process to scale and we eventually want to
automate parts of it.
    The ﬁrst thing to reason about when tracking value origins through source code
is to identify those regions of code that could have inﬂuenced the value simply
because they were executed. In our example, this is particularly easy. We only need
to consider the code of the fib() function, as the defect occurs between its call
and its return.
    Because earlier statements may inﬂuence later statements (but not vice versa),
we must now examine the order in which the statements were executed. We end
up in a control ﬂow graph, as shown in Figure 7.1. Such a graph is built as follows:
■    Each statement of a program is mapped to a node. (In compiler construction—
     the origin of control ﬂow graphs—statements that must follow each other are
150   CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors




                                     Entry: fib(n) 0




                                           int f        1




                                       int f0 = 1       2




                                       int f1 = 1       3




                                     while (n > 1)      4




                                          n=n—1         5




                                       f = f0 + f1      6




                                           f0 = f1      7




                                           f1 = f       8




                                          return f      9




                                            Exit        10


                                      A             B
                                      Control flow:
                                      A precedes B;
                                      B follows A

      FIGURE 7.1
      The fib() control ﬂow graph.
                                                 7.2 Understanding Control Flow           151



     combined into nodes called basic blocks. In Figure 7.1, for instance, nodes 1–3
     and 5–8 would form basic blocks.)
■    Edges connecting the nodes represent the possible control ﬂow between the
     statements—a possible execution sequence of statements. An edge from a
     statement A to a statement B means that during execution statement B may
     immediately be executed after statement A.
■    An entry and exit node represent the beginning and the end of the program or
     function.
    In Figure 7.1, for instance, you can see that after f1 = f (statement 8); we
always have to check the loop condition (statement 4) before possibly returning
from fib() (statements 9 and 10).
    For structured programming languages such as C, a control ﬂow graph (such as
that shown in Figure 7.1) is straightforward to produce. All one needs is a pattern
for each control structure, as sketched in Figure 7.2. The actual control ﬂow graph
for a program is composed from such patterns.
   There are situations, though, where the control ﬂow cannot be determined from
such patterns. All of these impose difﬁcult situations for debugging. List 7.1 outlines
the most important caveats you should be aware of.



           while (COND)                    do                        for



                 BODY                     BODY                      INIT



          while (COND)               while (COND )                  COND
              BODY;

                                     do   {                         BODY
                                          BODY
             if (COND)               }while (COND);
                                                                    INCR

    THEN-BLOCK          ELSE-BLOCK
                                                            for (INIT; COND; INCR)
                                                               BODY;
             if (COND)
              THEN-BLOCK;
             else
              ELSE-BLOCK;

FIGURE 7.2
Some common control ﬂow patterns.
152   CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors



      LIST 7.1: Control Flow Caveats
      Jumps and gotos. A jump or goto is an unconditional transfer of control; goto 50 means
         to resume execution at line or label 50. Unconstrained gotos can make reasoning about
         programs much more difﬁcult—in particular, if they involve jumps into loop or function
         bodies. (In technical terms, this may make the control ﬂow graph unstructured or irre-
         ducible.) Fortunately, most programmers (and languages) avoid goto statements as a
         whole or use them only to jump to the end of a block.
      Indirect jumps. Even more complicated than a goto to a speciﬁc line is a computed goto,
          also known as an indirect jump. A statement such as goto X transfers control to the
          statement or address as stored in the variable X.
             Unconstrained indirect jumps make reasoning about control ﬂow very difﬁcult because
          in principle they can be followed by an arbitrary statement. Fortunately, indirect jumps are
          almost exclusively used for dynamic function dispatch. The address of a function is taken
          from some table and then used for invocation. Languages such as C and C++ provide
          such mechanisms as function pointers.
      Dynamic dispatch. A very constrained form of indirect jumps is found in object-oriented
         languages. A call such as shape.draw() invokes the draw() method of the object
         referenced by shape. The actual destination of the call is resolved at runtime, depending
         on the class of the object. If the object is a rectangle, then Rectangle.draw() is called.
         If it is a circle, then Circle.draw() is called.
             Dynamic dispatch is a powerful tool, but also a frequent source of misunderstanding
         when reasoning about program code. For every method call, one must be aware of the
         possible destinations.
      Exceptions. By throwing an exception, a function can transfer control back to its caller, which
         either must handle the exception or rethrow it to its respective caller. (Instead of the caller,
         a surrounding block may also handle or rethrow the exception.)
            In the presence of exceptions, one must be aware that control may never reach the
         “ofﬁcial” end of a function but be transferred directly to the caller. Be sure that an exception
         does not go by unnoticed, such that you know that it has occurred.




      7.3 TRACKING DEPENDENCES
      The control ﬂow graph is the basis for all deduction about programs, as it shows
      how information propagates along the sequence of statements. Let’s go a little more
      into detail here. Exactly how do individual statements affect the information ﬂow?
      And how are statements affected by the information ﬂow?

      7.3.1 Effects of Statements
      To contribute to the computation, every statement of the program must (at least
      potentially) affect the information ﬂow in some way. We distinguish the following
      two types of effects.
                                                       7.3 Tracking Dependences           153



Write
A statement can change the program state (i.e., assign a value to a variable). For
example, the statement v1 = 1 writes a value to the variable v1.
   The“program state”considered here is a very general term. For instance,printing
some text on an output device changes the state of the device. Sending a message
across the network changes the state of attached devices. To some extent, the “pro-
gram state” thus becomes the state of the world. Therefore, it is useful to limit the
considered state—for instance, to the hardware boundaries.


Control
A statement may change the program counter—that is,determine which statement
is to be executed next. In Figure 7.1, the while statement determines whether
the next statement is either 5 or 9. Obviously, we are only talking about con-
ditional changes to the program counter here—that is, statements that have at
least two possible successors in the control ﬂow graph, dependent on the program
state.
    In principle,one may consider the program counter as part of the program state.
In practice, though, locations in the program state, and locations in the program
code, are treated conceptually as separate dimensions of space and time. Figure 1.1
uses this distinction to represent the intuition about what is happening in a pro-
gram run.


7.3.2 Affected Statements
Affecting the information ﬂow by writing state or controlling execution represents
the active side of how a statement affects the information ﬂow. However,statements
are also passively affected by other statements. For example:
■   Read. A statement can read the program state (i.e.,read a value from a variable).
    For example, the statement v2 = v1 + 1 reads a value from the variable v1.
    Consequently, the effect of the statement is affected by the state of v1.
         Just as in the writing state, the “program state” considered here is a very
    general term. For instance, reading some text from an input device reads the
    state of the device. Reading a message across the network reads the state of
    attached devices.
■   Execution. To have any effect, a statement must be executed. Consequently,
    if the execution of a statement B is potentially controlled by another statement A,
    then B is affected by A.
   For each statement S of a program, we can determine what part of the state is
being read or written by S (as deduced from the actual program code), and which
other statements are controlled by S (as deduced from the control ﬂow graph).As an
example, consider Table 7.1, which lists the actions of the statements in the fib()
program.
154   CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors




                   Table 7.1    Effects of the fib() Statements
                       Statement                  Reads         Writes            Controls
                   0   fib(n)                                   n                 1–10
                   1   int f                                    f
                   2   f0 = 1                                   f0
                   3   f1 = 1                                   f1
                   4   while (n > 1)              n                               5–8
                   5   n = n – 1                  n             n
                   6   f = f0 + f1                f0, f1        f
                   7   f0 = f1                    f1            f0
                   8   f1 = f                     f             f1
                   9   return f                   f             return value
                   Note: Each statement reads or writes a variable, or controls
                   whether other statements are executed.




      7.3.3 Statement Dependences
      Given the effects of statements, as well as the statements thereby affected, we
      can construct dependences between statements, showing how they inﬂuence each
      other. We distinguish the following two types of dependences.

      Data dependence
      A statement B is data dependent on a statement A if
         ■ A writes some variable V (or more generally, part of the program state) that
           is being read by B, and
         ■ there is at least one path in the control ﬂow graph from A to B in which V

           is not being written by some other statement.
      In other words, the outcome of A can inﬂuence the data read by B.
          Figure 7.3 shows the data dependences in the fib() program. By following the
      dashed arrows on the right side, one can determine where the data being written
      by some statement are being read by another statement. For instance, the variable
      f0 being written by statement 2, f0 = 1, is read in statement 6, f = f0 + f1.


      Control dependence
      A statement B is control dependent on a statement A if B’s execution is poten-
      tially controlled by A. In other words, the outcome of A determines whether B is
      executed.
          The dotted arrows on the left side of Figure 7.3 show the control dependences
      in fib(). Each statement of the body of the while loop is dependent on entering
                                                               7.3 Tracking Dependences   155




                                       Entry: fib(n) 0



                                              int f            1



                                            int f0 = 1         2



                                            int f1 = 1         3



                                           while (n > 1)       4



                                             n=n—1             5




                                            f = f0 + f1        6



                                              f0 = f1          7



                                              f1 = f           8




                                             return f
                                                               9



                                               Exit            10


             A         B                                   A         B
             Control dependency:                           Data dependency:
                          ,
             A controls B s execution;                     A’s data is used in B;
             B is control dependent on A                   B is data dependent on A

FIGURE 7.3
fib() dependence graph.
156   CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors



      the loop (and thus dependent on the head of the while loop). All other statements
      are dependent on the entry of the function (as it determines whether the body is
      actually executed).
         The control and data dependences of a program, as shown in Figure 7.3, form
      a graph—the program-dependence graph.This graph is the basis for a number of
      program-analysis techniques, as it reﬂects all inﬂuences within a program.


      7.3.4 Following Dependences
      Following the control and data dependences in the program-dependence graph,
      one can determine which statements inﬂuence which other statements—in terms
      of data or control, or both. In particular, one can answer two important questions:
      1. Where does this value go to? Given a statement S writing a variable V , we can
         determine the impact of S by checking which other statements are dependent
         on S—and which other statements are dependent on these. Let’s follow the
         dependences to see what happens when we call fib(). In Figure 7.3, the value
         of n is being used in the while head (statement 4) as well as in the while body
         (statement 5). Because the while head also controls the assignments to f, f0,
         and f1 (statements 6–8), the value of n also determines the values of f, f0, and
         f1—and eventually,the returned value f.This is how fib() is supposed to work.
      2. Where does this value come from? Given a statement S reading a variable V , we
         can determine the statements that possibly inﬂuenced V by following back the
         dependences of S. Let’s now follow the dependences to see where the arbitrary
         value returned by fib(1) comes from. In Figure 7.3, consider the return value f
         in statement 9.The value of f can come from two sources. It can be computed in
         statement 6 from f0 and f1 (and,following their control dependences,eventually
         n). However, it also can come from statement 1, which is the declaration of f. In
         the C language, a local variable is not initialized and thus may hold an arbitrary
         value. It is exactly this value that is returned if the while body is not executed.
         In other words, this is the arbitrary value returned by fib(1).


      7.3.5 Leveraging Dependences
      Following dependences through programs is a common technique for ﬁnding out
      the origins of values. But from where does one get the dependences?
         Typically, programmers implicitly determine dependences while reading the
      code. Assessing the effect of each statement is part of understanding the program.
      Studies have shown that programmers effectively follow dependences while debug-
      ging,either in a forward fashion to assess the impact of a statement or in a backward
      fashion to ﬁnd out which other parts of the program might have inﬂuenced a state-
      ment. As Weiser (1982) puts it: “When debugging, programmers view programs
      in ways that need not conform to the programs’ textual or modular structures.”
      Thus, dependences become an important guide for navigating through the code.
                                                              7.4 Slicing Programs       157




FIGURE 7.4
Following dependences in CODESURFER. For each variable, one can query the predecessors
and successors along the dependence graph.


    Obtaining explicit dependences such that they can be leveraged in tools is also
feasible and is part of several advanced program-analysis tools. Figure 7.4 shows a
screenshot of the CODESURFER tool, one of the most advanced program-analysis
tools available. Rather than visualizing dependences as in Figure 7.3, CODESURFER
allows programmers to explore the dependences interactively by navigating to
predecessors and successors according to data and control dependences.



7.4 SLICING PROGRAMS
Using dependences,one can check for speciﬁc defect patterns and focus on speciﬁc
subsets of the program being debugged (the subset that may have inﬂuenced a
speciﬁc statement or the subset that may be inﬂuenced by a speciﬁc statement).
Such a subset is called a slice, and the corresponding operation is called slicing.

7.4.1 Forward Slices
By following all dependences from a given statement A, one eventually reaches all
statements of which the read variables or execution could ever be inﬂuenced by A.
This set of statements is called a program slice,or more speciﬁcally the forward slice
of S F (A). Formally, it consists of all statements that (transitively) depend on A:
                                 S F (A) ⫽ {B|A →⫹ B}
In a slice S F (A), the originating statement A is called the slicing criterion.
   As an example for a forward slice, consider Figure 7.3. The forward slice origi-
nating at statement 2, f0 = 1, ﬁrst includes statement 6, f = f0 + f1. Via f, the
158   CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors



      slice also includes statement 8, f1 = f, and statement 9, return f. Via f1, the slice
      ﬁnally also includes statement 7, f0 = f1. Overall, the forward slice S F (2) is thus
      S F (2) ⫽ {2, 6, 7, 8, 9}.
           More important than the statements included in a slice are the statements not
      included in a slice, in that these can be in no way affected by the original statement.
      In our case, the statements excluded are not just the statements 0 and 1 (hardly
      surprising,as they are always executed before statement 2) but statements 4 and 5—
      the head of the while loop. In other words, the execution of the while loop is
      independent of the initial value of f0.

      7.4.2 Backward Slices
      The term forward slice implies that there is also a backward slice. To compute the
      backward slice of B, one proceeds backward along the dependences. Thus, we
      can determine all statements that could have inﬂuenced B. This is most useful in
      determining where the program state at execution of B could have come from.
      Formally, the backward slice S B (B) is computed as

                                       S B (B) ⫽ {A|A →∗ B}

      Again, B is called the slicing criterion of S B (B).
          As an example for a backward slice, again consider Figure 7.3. The backward
      slice of statement 9, return f, ﬁrst includes statement 1, int f, and statement 6,
      f = f0 + f1. Because statement 6 is control dependent on the while loop, the
      slice also includes statement 4, while (n > 1), and statement 5, n = n + 1, on
      which statement 4 is data dependent. Because f0 and f1 are computed in statements
      7 and 8 and are initialized in statements 2 and 3, all of these statements also become
      part of the backward slice—which means that the slice includes all statements of
      fib(), or S B (9) ⫽ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}.
          Having all statements being included in the backward slice of a returned value is
      quite typical. After all, if some statement would not contribute to the computation
      this would be a code smell, as discussed in Section 7.5. However, if a function
      computes multiple values, a backward slice for one of these values may well result
      in a true subset. As an example, consider the program in Example 7.2(a), which
      computes the sum and the product of the range of integers [a, b].The backward slice
      of write(mul), shown in Example 7.2(b) slices away all those parts that compute
      sum and cannot inﬂuence the computation or output of mul in any way.

      7.4.3 Slice Operations
      To further focus on speciﬁc behavior, one can combine several slices. Typical
      operations on slices include the following:

      Chops. The intersection between a forward and a backward slice is called a chop.
        Chops are useful for ﬁnding out how some statement A (originating the forward
        slice) inﬂuences another statement B (originating the backward slice).
                                                                 7.4 Slicing Programs       159




EXAMPLE 7.2: Slicing away irrelevant program parts: (a) entire program,
(b)backward slice S B (13), (c) backbone S B (12) ∩ S B (13), and (d) dice S B ⫻ S B (12)

   1   int main() {                         1   int main() {
   2     int a, b, sum, mul;                2
   3     sum = 0;                           3
   4     mul = 1;                           4       mul = 1;
   5     a = read();                        5       a = read();
   6     b = read();                        6       b = read();
   7     while (a <= b) {                   7       while (a <= b) {
   8       sum = sum + a;                   8
   9       mul = mul * a;                   9           mul = mul * a;
  10       a = a + 1;                      10           a = a + 1;
  11     }                                 11       }
  12     write(sum);                       12
  13     write(mul);                       13       write(mul);
  14   }                                   14   }

                  (a)                                      (b)


   1   int main() {                         1   int main() {
   2                                        2
   3                                        3
   4                                        4       mul = 1;
   5       a = read();                      5
   6       b = read();                      6
   7       while (a <= b) {                 7
   8                                        8
   9                                        9           mul = mul * a;
  10           a = a + 1;                  10
  11       }                               11
  12                                       12
  13                                       13       write(mul);
  14   }                                   14   }

                  (c)                                      (d)




     In the fib() program from Figure 7.3, for instance, a chop from statements
  3–7 also includes statements 6 and 8, thus denoting all possible paths by which
  the initial value of f1 could have inﬂuenced f0.
Backbones. The intersection between two slices is called a backbone slice, or
  backbone for short. A backbone is useful for ﬁnding out those parts of an
  application that contribute to the computation of several values.
     As an example, consider the program shown in Example 7.2. The back-
  bone of the two backward slices of write(sum) and write(mul) consists of
  those statements included in both slices—namely, a = read(), b = read(),
  while (a <= b), and a = a + 1.
160   CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors



            As the name suggests, backbones are central parts of the computation. In
         debugging, ﬁnding a backbone is most useful if one has multiple infected values
         at different places and wants to determine a possible common origin.
      Dices. The difference between two slices is called a dice. A dice is useful for ﬁnding
         out how the backward slice of some variable differs from the backward slice of
         some other variable.
            Again, consider the program shown in Example 7.2. If we subtract the back-
         ward slice of write(sum) from the backward slice of write(mul) (shown in
         the ﬁgure), all that remains is the initialization mul = 1 and the assignment
         mul = mul * a.
             Dices are most useful if one knows that a program is“largely correct”—that is,
         most of the values it computes are correct but some are not. By subtracting the
         backward slices of the correct variables from the backward slices of the infected
         variables one can focus on those statements that only contribute to the infected
         values—that is, those statements likely to cause the failure.


      7.4.4 Leveraging Slices
      Just like dependences,slices can be leveraged in programming environments,allow-
      ing programmers to explore slices and to explicitly ignore those parts of a program
      that are irrelevant for a speciﬁc behavior. As an example,consider the CODESURFER
      screenshot shown in Figure 7.5, showing the program from Example 7.2(a). The
      programmer has selected statement 13, write(mul), as the slicing criterion and
      has chosen to view its backward slice. CODESURFER highlights all statements that
      are part of the backward slice.As in Example 7.2(b),it turns out that the computation
      of sum has no inﬂuence whatsoever on the computation of mul.
          In addition to displaying slices, CODESURFER can perform slice operations (as
      discussed in Section 7.4.3).This allows the programmer to further focus on possible
      failure origins.

      7.4.5 Executable Slices
      Comparing the backward slice as determined by CODESURFER with the slice as
      shown in Example 7.2(b), you may notice a small difference: the CODESURFER
      slice also includes the declarations of a, b, and mul, whereas Example 7.2(b) does
      not. Could it be that CODESURFER determines dependences we do not know
      about?
          The reason CODESURFER (Figure 7.5) includes the declarations in the slice is
      not that anything would depend on these declarations. (If something would, this
      would be an error, as discussed in Section 7.5.) CODESURFER includes these decla-
      rations because it attempts to make the slice executable. That is, the slice should be
      an “independent program guaranteed to represent faithfully the original program
      within the domain of the speciﬁed subset of behavior”(i.e.,the state of the program
      as read by the slicing criterion). Because the program needs to be executable, all
                                                            7.5 Deducing Code Smells        161




FIGURE 7.5
A program slice in CODESURFER. All statements that are part of the slice are highlighted.


variables have to be declared, regardless of whether the declarations are actually
part of some dependence or not. In our examples, though, we do not require the
slice to be executable. Thus, we omit declarations if they are not involved in any
dependence.




7.5 DEDUCING CODE SMELLS
In Section 7.3.4 we saw how a data dependence from the uninitialized variable f
caused the fib() program to fail. In general, we can assume that any read from an
uninitialized variable is a bad idea, and we may thus easily qualify any such attempt
as an error. In fact, a number of common errors can be directly detected from
the dependence graph—that is, deduced from the program code alone. Examples
include the following.


7.5.1 Reading Uninitialized Variables
Uninitialized variables, such as f in fib(), are a common source of errors. In terms
of dependences, declarations such as int f should have no inﬂuence on any other
statement. If they do, this should be considered an error.
162   CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors



          Compilers routinely determine variable usage and dependences when they
      optimize the generated code. Thus, they can easily report if some variable appears
      to be used although not initialized:
         $ gcc -Wall -O fibo.c
         fibo.c: In function ‘fib’:
         fibo.c:7: warning: ‘f’ might be used uninitialized
                   in this function
         $ _
      (The -O option turns on optimization, and the -Wall option turns on almost all
      warnings.) As the wording suggests, the compiler may err in reporting a variable as
      being used. This is illustrated by the following example.
         int go;
         switch (color) {
             case RED:
             case AMBER:
                 go = 0;
                 break;
             case GREEN:
                 go = 1;
                 break;
         }
         if (go) { ... }
      Here, go is initialized if color is one of RED, AMBER, or GREEN. If color has another
      value, though, go will remain uninitialized. The compiler is unable to determine
      automatically whether color may take another value. Nonetheless, the compiler
      emits a warning such that the programmer can take a look at the code.


      7.5.2 Unused Values
      If some variable is written, but never read, this is likely to be an error. In the depen-
      dence graph, a write into such a variable translates into a statement on which
      no other statement is data dependent—in other words, a statement without any
      effect.
          Compilers (and derived program-analysis tools) can also warn against unused
      values. However, as there are many ways to access a variable that may go unnoticed
      by the compiler (including access of other modules to global variables, access via
      pointers, and so on) the feature is typically limited to local variables.


      7.5.3 Unreachable Code
      If some code is never executed, this is likely to be an error. In the dependence
      graph, this translates into a statement that is not control dependent on any other
      statement.
          In many simple cases, compilers can warn against unreachable code. Consider
      the following example.
                                                       7.5 Deducing Code Smells           163



   if (w >= 0)
       printf("w is non-negative\n");
   else if (w > 0)
       printf("w is positive\n");
The second printf() will never be executed because its condition is sub-
sumed by the ﬁrst condition. Its execution is dependent on no other statement.
The compiler, being smart enough to notice the subsumption, issues a warning
such as:
   $ gcc -Wunreachable-code -O noop.c
   noop.c:4: warning: will never be executed
   $ _
    Why do we have to enable warnings about unreachable code explicitly? The rea-
son is that during debugging programmers frequently insert statements to observe
the behavior (see Chapter 8) or to check their expectations (see Chapter 10). Such
statements may be written in such a way that executing them would show the
presence of a failure. The following is an example.
   switch (color) {
       case RED:
       case AMBER:
           go = 0;
           break;
       case GREEN:
           go = 1;
           break;
       default:
           printf("This can’t happen\n");
           exit(1);
   }
If the compiler reports that the printf() statement is unreachable,this is actually a
good sign. (At the same time,the warning about go used before initialization should
also go away.)
    If one of the preceding conditions occurs,this typically is an error in the program
in question. At the least it is a code smell that should be veriﬁed before the code
goes into production.
    So far, the code smells we have seen are all related to dependences concerning
the usage of variables. In addition to these general dependences there are depen-
dences that are speciﬁc to some language feature or runtime library—and again,
such dependences can be leveraged to detect errors.

Memory leaks. In languages without garbage collection, such as C or C++, the pro-
  grammer is responsible for deallocating dynamic memory. If the last reference
  to a chunk of dynamic memory is lost, the chunk can no longer be deallo-
  cated (a memory leak occurs). Example 7.3 shows a C function that has a
  memory leak at return 0. The reference p to the memory allocated in line 4
  is lost.
164   CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors




      EXAMPLE 7.3: A potential memory leak. On premature return, memory pointed
      to by p is not deallocated
       1   /* Allocate and read in SIZE integers */
       2   int *readbuf(int size)
       3   {
       4       int *p = malloc(size * sizeof(int));
       5       for (int i = 0; i < size; i++)
       6       {
       7           p[i] = readint();
       8           if (p[i] == 0)
       9               return 0; // end-of-file
      10       }
      11
      12        return p;
      13   }




             Just as we tracked the effects of statements on variables in Table 7.1, we can
         track the effects of statements on dynamic memory. For each statement,we check
         whether it allocates, uses, or deallocates a chunk. We also check whether the
         reference to the chunk is still live—that is, accessible by other statements—and
         we can identify statements where a reference becomes lost, such as overwriting
         an existing reference or returning from a function in which the reference was
         declared a local variable. If there is a path in the control ﬂow graph from an
         allocation to a statement where a chunk becomes dead without going through
         a deallocation ﬁrst, this is a memory leak. In Example 7.3, such a path goes from
         line 4 to line 9.
      Interface misuse. In addition to memory,one can think of other resources that must
         be explicitly deallocated when they are no longer in use.As an example,consider
         streams. An input/output stream is ﬁrst opened, but must be closed when it is
         no longer used. Checking for such conditions uses the same mechanisms as
         memory leaks. If there is a path in the control ﬂow graph from a stream opening
         to a statement where the stream reference becomes dead without going through
         a closing ﬁrst,this is an error. Similar techniques apply to resources such as locks,
         sockets, devices, and so on.
      Null pointers. In the same style as memory leaks, we can check whether a pointer
         being null may be accidentally referenced. This happens if there is a path from a
         statement in which a null pointer p is being initialized to a statement in which
         p is dereferenced without going through some assignment to p.
             In Example 7.3,for instance,the malloc() function may return a null pointer
         if no more memory is available. Consequently,in the expression p[i] the pointer
         p may be null, resulting in a potential runtime failure. Therefore, this error can
         be detected automatically. The code should be changed such that malloc()
         returning a null pointer ends in a user-friendly diagnosis.
                                                     7.5 Deducing Code Smells          165



   Given a control ﬂow graph, and basic data and control dependences, a tool
that checks for such common errors is not too difﬁcult to build. Some advanced
compilers even have such built-in functionality. However, there are also external
tools that are especially built for detecting code smells. As an example, consider
the FINDBUGS tool for JAVA programs. FINDBUGS scans JAVA bytecode for defect
patterns—that is, common programming errors (as those listed previously)—and
highlights potential problems, as shown in Figure 7.6. Table 7.2 lists some of the
most common defect patterns detected by FINDBUGS.
   Tools such as FINDBUGS are highly useful in detecting code smells before
they end up in production code. One should keep in mind, though, that these
tools can report false positives—that is, they can report possible inﬂuences where
indeed there are not. The FINDBUGS authors, for instance, list a false positive rate
of 50 percent, meaning that only every second smell reported by FINDBUGS is
indeed an error. Programmers are well advised,though,to rewrite even those smells
that are not errors—simply because this way they will not shown up in the next
diagnostic.
   In general, whenever a failure occurs it is good practice to use a static checker
such as FINDBUGS (or the compiler with all warnings enabled) to rule out common




FIGURE 7.6
Detecting defect patterns with FINDBUGS.
166   CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors




               Table 7.2 Some Defect Patterns Detected by FINDBUGS

               Class implements Cloneable but does not deﬁne or use clone method
               Method might ignore exception
               Null pointer dereference in method
               Class deﬁnes equal(); should it be equals()?
               Method may fail to close database resource
               Method may fail to close stream
               Method ignores return value
               Unread ﬁeld
               Unused ﬁeld
               Unwritten ﬁeld
               Private method is never called




      defect patterns as a failure cause. In addition,if one has a concrete failure to deal with
      one can also apply checking tools that search for common issues in this particular
      run—such as memory issues or violation of invariants. These dynamic tools are
      discussed in Chapter 10.



      7.6 LIMITS OF STATIC ANALYSIS
      As discussed in Section 7.5, a tool such as FINDBUGS has a false positive rate of
      50 percent. Why can’t we rewrite tools such as FINDBUGS to have no false positives
      at all?
          The reason for the imprecision of FINDBUGS (or CODESURFER, or any tool
      using static analysis) is that there are a number of language constructs that make
      computing precise data dependences difﬁcult, if not impossible. For instance, given
      a statement A that writes a[i], and a following statement B that reads a[j], how
      can one know whether A may inﬂuence B? To answer this question requires ﬁnding
      out whether i = j can ever hold. Although it may be possible to answer a speciﬁc
      question such as this, in general such questions are instances of Turing’s halting
      problem and thus undecidable.
          Note that this limitation is not necessarily prone to machines. Humans suffer
      the very same problem. The following is an example showing the limits of static
      analysis. In the following piece of code, is x being used uninitialized or not?
         int x;
         for(i=j=k=1;--j||k;k=j?i%j?k:k---j:(j=i+=2));
         write(x);
                                                             7.6 Limits of Static Analysis           167



   The answer is: nobody knows. The for loop terminates if and only if i holds an
odd perfect number, an integer that is the sum of its proper positive divisors (28 is
a perfect number because 28 ⫽ 1 ⫹ 2 ⫹ 4 ⫹ 7 ⫹ 14). In that nobody knows today
whether odd perfect numbers exist,it is unknown whether the write(x) statement
will ever be executed—and neither humans nor machines have a straightforward
way of deciding this.
   In practice,though,we may well treat write(x) as unreachable. It is known that
an odd perfect number must be greater than 10300 , and thus (assuming sufﬁciently
long integers i, j, and k), we must prepare for at least 10600 loop iterations. In
addition, write(x) is either unreachable or uses an uninitialized variable, and thus
an error anyway—and this ambiguity is something a tool could determine.
   As a consequence, static analysis tools must resort to conservative approxi-
mations—for instance, an approximation saying that any write to the array a[]
may inﬂuence any read from the array a[]. Although this approximation may
result in more data dependences than strictly necessary, it at least ensures that no
data dependence is falsely omitted. List 7.2 outlines the most important language
constructs that require approximations.

LIST 7.2: Data Flow Caveats
Indirect access. To determine that a write to a variable V inﬂuences a later read of this variable
    requires that V be precisely determined. If V is a location that is determined at runtime,
    however, one has to resort to approximations.
       As a typical example, consider array accesses. If some statement writes into a[i], one
    has to determine the possible values of i in order to track precise dependences. These
    possible values can be approximated by following back the dependences of i (assuming
    they all lead to constants) or by symbolic evaluation of i. (Humans, of course, may have
    better means of abstracting possible values of i.)
Pointers. Writing to a location referenced by a pointer or reference P requires that one know the
   locations P may point to or reference. This type of analysis is known as points-to analysis,
   which is a common part of optimizing compilers. A simple and common automated strategy
   is to assume that a pointer P may point to all objects the addresses of which have been
   taken in the program code (again, human reasoning is usually more precise).
Functions. Including function calls in the analysis results in dependences between the argu-
   ments at the call sites (the context ) and the formal parameters at the function entries. If a
   function is called from multiple sites in a program, one can choose to inline the function
   body at each call site, resulting in precise dependences. This approach fails, though, for
   large numbers of functions. It is also infeasible for recursive functions.
      A viable alternative is to introduce summary edges at call sites that represent the
   transitive dependences of the function in question. Such summaries also introduce
   imprecision.
More features. Other features that make computing dependences difﬁcult include object
   orientation and concurrency.
168   CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors



          The drawback of such approximations is that dependences are difﬁcult to track.
      In the sample program discussed in Chapters 1 and 6, tracking the origins of a[0]
      stops short at the shell_sort() function, which writes into every element of a[].
      Therefore,all one can deduce at this point is that the content of a[] was responsible
      for the value of a[0]. Consequently, any member of a[] may inﬂuence a[0].
          If one is really paranoid about conservative approximation,static analysis results
      in virtually no results for many real-life programs. If a stray pointer may access
      noninitialized memory, and if an array index may go out of bounds, anything can
      happen—meaning that conservative approximation returns “I don’t know” for any
      program property. Likewise, if a function is unavailable to analysis (due to lack of
      source code, for instance), calling such a function also stops static analysis on the
      spot. Anything can happen after the function is done. However, even if there were


      LIST 7.3: Source Code Caveats
      Source mismatch. Whenever processing source code, one must make sure that the source
         code being read actually corresponds to the program being executed. For released pro-
         grams, this means to use version control, as discussed in Section 2.9 in Chapter 2.
         For a local program, be sure not to confound the locations (Bug Story 8). Using incre-
         mental construction (using tools such as make), be sure that all compilations are up
         to date.
      Macros and preprocessors. A preprocessor is a program that manipulates program text before
        it is being fed to the compiler. In Example 7.1, for instance, the #include statement in
        line 3 makes the C preprocessor insert the contents of the stdio.h header.
            Preprocessors can be tricky because they may introduce uncommon behavior. For
        instance, a macro deﬁnition such as #define int long causes all subsequent
        int types to be read in as long types. Programmers typically make macros explicit
        to ease understanding. Modern programming languages avoid the usage of prepro-
        cessors.
      Undeﬁned behavior. Some programming languages deliberately do not specify the semantics
        of some constructs. Instead, each compiler can choose its own implementation. In C, for
        instance, the value range of a char is not deﬁned. It may be anything from an 8-bit to a
        128-bit value or even larger.
           Issues with undeﬁned behavior typically arise when a program is ported to a new envi-
        ronment or a new compiler. Being aware of undeﬁned behavior helps to identify errors
        quickly.
      Aspects. An aspect is a piece of code that is added (or woven) to speciﬁc parts of a program—
         for instance, an aspect that prints out “set() has been called” at the beginning of every
         set() method.
            Aspects are great tools for logging and debugging. We will cover these uses in
         Section 8.2.3 in Chapter 8. However, as adding an aspect to a program can cause arbitrary
         changes in behavior, aspects can also seriously hamper our ability to understand the code.
                                                        7.6 Limits of Static Analysis     169




    BUG STORY 8
    Stubborn Hello
    In the beginning of my programming career, I was writing a simple program called
    hello that would output Hello, world! to the UNIX console. My program worked
    ﬁne, but as I changed the text to Bonjour, monde! and compiled it, hello would
    still output Hello, world! Regardless of what I did, the text would remain ﬁxed.
       A friend then explained to me that by typing hello at the prompt, I was invoking
    the preinstalled GNU hello program instead of my own. He reported similar problems
    with a program of his own called test—conﬂicting with the built-in test command.
    I quickly learned to type ./test, ./sort, ./hello, and so on to start my own
    programs from my directory.

no conservative approximation deduction brings a number of risks simply by being
based on abstraction, including the following.
■    Risk of code mismatch. Using source code to deduce facts in a concrete pro-
     gram run requires that the run actually be created from this very source code.
     Otherwise, bad mismatches can happen (see List 7.3).
■    Risk of abstracting away. To actually execute the source code, one requires a
     compiler, an operating system, a runtime library, or other tools. When deducing
     from source code,one cannot take all of this“real world”into account. One assumes
     that the environment of the source code operates properly. More precisely, one
     assumes semantics of the program code that hold regardless of the environment. In
     rare instances,though,failures can be caused by a defect in the environment—and
     therefore, deducing an error from source code will be impossible.
■    Risk of imprecision. In Figure 7.3 we saw that an ordinary program already
     has much data and many control dependences, such that any slice quickly
     encompasses large parts of the program. In the presence of data ﬂow caveats (see
     List 7.2), slices become even larger, as conservative approximation is required
     to make sure no dependence is lost. On average, a static slice encompasses
     about 30 percent of the program code, which is a signiﬁcant reduction but still
     a huge amount of code.
  The risk of code mismatch can be easily taken care of by establishing precise
conﬁguration management. Abstracting away is a risk inherent to any type of pure
deduction. The risk of imprecision, though, can be addressed by two mechanisms:
1. Veriﬁcation. If one can constrain the possible program states, it is possible to
   increase the precision of deduction. As an example,consider the following code.
        p = &y;
        if (x > 0)
            y = x;
        if (y > 0)
            p = &x;
 170     CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors



            Where can the pointer p point to after this code? It is trivial to prove that the
            condition x > 0 and the assignment y = x imply y > 0. Thus, if we know that
            x > 0 holds we can ensure that p points to x. Such constraints can be com-
            puted, accumulated, and resolved across the code, thereby increasing precision.
            In Chapter 10, we see how such conditions can be expressed as assertions and
            veriﬁed at runtime as well as deduced at compile time.
         2. Observation.Rather than deducing facts from source code that hold for all runs,
            one can combine deduction with facts observed from concrete program runs—
            notably from the one run that fails. Not only does this give concrete ﬁndings
            about the failure in question, as a side effect observation also removes the risk
            of abstracting away.



         7.7 CONCEPTS
How To To isolate value origins, follow back the dependences from the statement in
          question (Section 7.3).
       Dependences can uncover code smells—in particular common errors such as use
          of uninitialized variables, unused values, or unreachable code.
       Before debugging, get rid of code smells reported by automated detection tools
          (such as the compiler).
       To slice a program, follow dependences from a statement S to determine all
          statements that:
          ■ Could be inﬂuenced by S ( forward slice)

          ■ Could inﬂuence S (backward slice)


            Using deduction alone includes a number of risks, including the risk of code
         mismatch, the risk of abstracting away relevant details, and the risk of imprecision.
            Any type of deduction is limited by the halting problem and must thus resort to
         conservative approximation.



         7.8 TOOLS
         CODESURFER. CODESURFER is considered among the most advanced static-
          analysis tools available. It is available free of charge to faculty members (if you are
          a student, ask your advisor). All others must purchase a license. CODESURFER is
          available at http://www.codesurfer.com/ .
         FINDBUGS. The FINDBUGS tool was developed by Hovemeyer and Pugh (2004).
           It is open source. Its project page is found at http://ﬁndbugs.sourceforge.net/ .
                                                          7.9 Further Reading       171




7.9 FURTHER READING
Weiser (1982) was the ﬁrst to discover that programmers mentally ignore state-
ments that cannot have an inﬂuence on a statement in which an erroneous state is
discovered. In this paper,Weiser also coined the term program slicing.
   The original approach by Weiser (1984) was based on data ﬂow equations.
The same year, Ottenstein and Ottenstein (1984) introduced the notion of the
program-dependence graph. Indeed, all later slicing approaches used a graph-based
representation of program dependences.
    Since these pioneer works, several researchers have extended the concept.
Tip (1995) still summarizes today’s state of the art in slicing. Regarding the
usefulness of slices, Binkley and Harman (2003) examined slice sizes in 43 C pro-
grams and found that the average slice size was under 30 percent of the original
program.
    Besides Hovemeyer and Pugh, several researchers have worked on using
static analysis to detect defect patterns. I speciﬁcally recommend the work of
Dawson Engler’s group on analyzing the Linux kernel. Chelf (2004) gives a
survey.
   The basic techniques for analyzing source code—especially scanning, parsing,
and detecting the effects of statements—are all part of compiler construction. As
an introduction, I recommend Aho et al. (1986) as well as the series of Modern
Compiler Implementation by Andrew Appel. Advanced readers may like to look
at Muchnik (1997).
    Christian Morgenstern’s poem “The Impossible Fact” is taken from Morgenstern
(1964).




EXERCISES
7.1 For the program shown in Example 7.2(a), write down:
    (a) The control ﬂow graph, as in Figure 7.1.
    (b) The effects of the statements, as in Table 7.1.
    (c) The control dependences, as in Figure 7.3.
    (d) The data dependences, as in Figure 7.3.
7.2 Sketch a mechanism based on the control ﬂow graph and dependences that
    ensures that after a call to free(x) the value x is no longer used.
7.3 For the defect patterns in Table 7.2, explain what type of program represen-
    tation (call ﬂow graph, data-dependence graph, source code) is needed to
    compute these smells.
172   CHAPTER 7 Deducing Errors



      7.4   Xie and Engler (2002) describe an analysis technique for catching defects
            in code. The idea is that redundant operations commonly ﬂag correctness
            errors. Xie and Engler applied their technique on the source code of the Linux
            kernel and found errors such as the following:
            ■ Idempotent operations: Such as when a variable is assigned to itself—for

              instance, in the following code, where the programmer makes a mistake
              while copying the structure sa to the structure da.
                    /* 2.4.1/net/appletalk/aarp.c:aarp_rcv() */
                    /* We need to make a copy of the entry. */
                    da.s_node = sa.s_node;
                    da.s_net = da.s_net;
            ■   Redundant assignments: Where a value assigned to a variable is not
                subsequently used—such as the value assigned to err in the following
                code.
                    /* 2.4.1/net/decnet/af_decnet.c:dn_wait_run() */
                    do {
                         ...
                         if (signal_pending(current)) {
                             err = -ERESTARTSYS;
                             break;
                         }
                         SOCK_SLEEP_PRE(sk);
                         if (scp->state != DN_RUN)
                             schedule();
                         SOCK_SLEEP_POST(sk);
                    } while (scp->state != DN_RUN);
                    return 0;
            ■   Dead code: Which is never executed—such as the following code, where
                the insertion of a logging statement causes the function to always return
                (note the misleading indentation).
                    /* 2.4.1/drivers/net/arcnet/arc-rimi.c:arcrimi_found() */
                    /* reserve the irq */
                    if (request_irq(dev->irq, &arcnet_interrupt ...))
                                    BUGMSG(D_NORMAL,
                                           "Can’t get IRQ %d!\n", dev->irq);
                        return -ENODEV;

                    Following code is never executed
                (a) For each of the previous categories, sketch how dependences can be
                    used to detect them.
                (b) Are these defects still present in the current Linux kernel? When were
                    they ﬁxed?

      7.5 What problems can you imagine that arise for users of deduction from code
          mismatch?
                                                            7.9 Further Reading        173



7.6 A dice can highlight those program statements computing an infected variable
    that cannot have an inﬂuence on a correct variable. How should a conservative
    approximation of indirect access look for a slice of a correct and a slice of an
    infected variable?




 Palmström, old, an aimless rover,
 walking in the wrong direction
 at a busy intersection
 is run over.
 “How,” he says, his life restoring
 and with pluck his death ignoring,
 “can an accident like this
 ever happen? What’s amiss?”
 “Did the state administration
 fail in motor transportation?
 Did police ignore the need
 for reducing driving speed?”
 “Isn’t there a prohibition,
 barring motorized transmission
 of the living to the dead?
 Was the driver right who sped …?”
 Tightly swathed in dampened tissues
 he explores the legal issues,
 and it soon is clear as air:
 Cars were not permitted there!
 And he comes to the conclusion:
 His mishap was an illusion,
 for, he reasons pointedly,
 that which must not, can not be.
                                                        – CHRISTIAN MORGENSTERN
                                                     The Impossible Fact (1905)
                                                                         CHAPTER


Observing Facts
                                                                           8
Although deduction techniques do not take concrete runs into account,observation
determines facts about what has happened in a concrete run. In this chapter, we
look under the hood of the actual program execution and introduce widespread
techniques for examining program executions and program states.These techniques
include classical logging, interactive debuggers, and postmortem debugging, as well
as eye-opening visualization and summarization techniques.



8.1 OBSERVING STATE
Deduction alone, as discussed in Chapter 7 is good for telling what might happen.
To ﬁnd out what is actually happening in a concrete failing run, though, we cannot
rely on deduction alone. We must take a look at the actual facts—that is, observe
what is going on—and judge whether the values are infected or not. The following
are some general principles of observation.
■   Do not interfere. Whatever you observe should be an effect of the original run—
    rather than an effect of your observation. Otherwise,you will have a difﬁcult time
    reasoning about the original run.That is,you have a Heisenbug (see Section 4.3.9
    in Chapter 4). Any observation technique should take care to alter the original
    run as little as possible.
■   Know what and when to observe. As discussed in Section 1.3 in Chapter 1, a
    program run is a long succession of huge program states, which is impossible
    to observe and comprehend as a whole. Observation is effective only if you
    know:
    – Which part of the state to observe (what)
    – At which moments during execution to observe (when)
■   Proceed systematically. Rather than observing values at random, let your search
    be guided by scientiﬁc method (Chapter 6). Always be aware of the current
    hypothesis, the observations predicted by the hypothesis, and how the actual
    observations contribute to the hypothesis.
    In the remainder of this chapter,we shall take a look at some common techniques
for observing what is going on in a run. These techniques can be used “as is” by         175
176   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



      humans, but they can also be leveraged by automated debugging techniques. Here,
      we ask:

          HOW CAN WE OBSERVE A PROGRAM RUN?




      8.2 LOGGING EXECUTION
      To observe facts about a run, we must make the facts accessible to the programmer.
      The simplest way of doing so is to have the program output the facts as desired—for
      instance, by inserting appropriate logging statements in the code. For instance, if
      a programmer wants to know the value of size in the function shell_sort(),
      he or she simply inserts a logging statement at the beginning of shell_sort(), as
      follows.
          printf("size = %d\n", size);

          Whenever this statement executes, a line such as
          size = 3

      will appear on the output device. Several outputs like this constitute a debugging
      log—a list of events that took place during the execution.
           This technique of observation is perhaps best known as printf debugging—
      from printf(), the function that in C outputs strings and values. (Although C
      and printf() slowly become obsolete, the term printf debugging lives on—and
      JAVA-inspired alternatives such as system-err-println debugging are just not catchy
      enough. Feel free to replace printf by the name of your favorite output function.)
      It is always available in some form. Even if a program might not log on a consolelike
      device,there always must be some effect that can be observed by the programmer—
      even if it is just a blinking LED. Being always available (and extremely easy to teach),
      it is also the most widespread debugging technique. In addition,requiring no infras-
      tructure other than a means of making the log available to the programmer, it is also
      the most basic technique. Although printf debugging is easy to use, it has several
      drawbacks as an observation technique.
      ■    Cluttered code. Because logging statements serve no other purpose than debug-
           ging,they do not help us in understanding the code.The main message a logging
           statement conveys is that the procedure in question was in need of debug-
           ging. Therefore, programmers frequently remove logging statements once the
           observation is done.
      ■    Cluttered output.Logging statements can produce a great deal of output,depend-
           ing on the number of events and variables traced. If the debugging log is
           interleaved with the ordinary output, both can be difﬁcult to separate properly.
           (This problem is best solved by using a designated output channel for debugging
           logs.)
                                                           8.2 Logging Execution        177



■   Slowdown.A huge amount of logging—in particular, to some slow device—can
    slow down the program. In addition to the obvious performance problem, this
    changes the program under test and introduces the risk of Heisenbugs (see
    Section 4.3.9 in Chapter 4).
■   Loss of data.For performance reasons,output is typically buffered before actually
    being written to the output device. In the event of a program crash,this buffered
    output is lost. Using ordinary (buffered) output for logging thus hides what hap-
    pened in the last few events before the crash. One can either use an unbuffered
    channel for logging (introducing a slowdown, as described previously) or make
    sure that the program ﬂushes its buffered logs in case of a crash.
   Taking care of all of these issues in a single output statement is quite a hassle.
Therefore, it is better to use dedicated logging techniques that allow far better
customization. In particular, we would like to do the following:
■   Use standard formats. Standard formats make it easy to search and ﬁlter logs
    for:
    – Speciﬁc code locations (“preﬁx each line with the current ﬁle or function”)
    – Speciﬁc events (“preﬁx each line with time”)
    – Speciﬁc data (“output all dates in Y-M-D format”)
■   Make logging optional. For performance reasons, logging is typically turned off
    in production code as well as in code not under consideration for debugging.
■   Allow for variable granularity. Depending on the problem you are working on,
    it may be helpful to focus on speciﬁc levels of detail. Focusing only on speciﬁc
    events also improves performance.
■   Be persistent. One should be enabled to reuse or reenable logging even when
    the debugging session is completed—just in case a similar problem resurfaces.

8.2.1 Logging Functions
The easiest way of customizing logging is to use or design a function that is built
for logging purposes only—a logging function. For instance, one could introduce a
function named dprintf() that would behave as printf(),but forward its output
to a debugging channel (rather than standard output) and allow the output to be
turned off. For instance, one could use
    dprintf("size = %d", size);

to output the variable size to the debugging log, possibly preﬁxed with com-
mon information such as date or time, or a simple marker indicating the type of
output:
    DEBUG: size = 3

   In addition,a function such as dprintf() can be easily set up not to generate any
output at all,which is useful for production code. In practice,though,a programmer
would not want to rely exclusively on such a debugging function—particularly if the
178   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



      logging code is to survive the current debugging session.The reason is performance.
      Even if dprintf() does nothing at all, the mere cost of computing the arguments
      and calling the function may be a penalty if it occurs often.
         Languages with a preprocessor (such as C and C++) offer a more cost-effective
      way of realizing logging. The idea is to use a logging macro—a piece of code that
      expands to a logging statement or a no-op (a statement without any effect),depend-
      ing on settings made at compilation. The following is a simple example of a LOG()
      macro that takes printf() arguments in parentheses.
         LOG(("size = %d", size));
      The macro LOG() is easily deﬁned as being based on dprintf() (or printf(), or
      any other suitable logging function).
         #define LOG(args) dprintf args
      The effect of this macro deﬁnition is that LOG(args) is being replaced by
      dprintf args in the subsequent code. Thus, the statement
         LOG(("size = %d", size));
      expands into
         dprintf("size = %d", size);

      The main beneﬁt of writing LOG() rather than dprintf() is that a macro can be
      set up to expand into nothing.
         #define LOG(args) ((void) 0)

      Thus,all LOG() statements get expanded to a no-op. Not even the arguments will be
      evaluated. Therefore, LOG() statements may even contain calls to some expensive
      function, as in
         LOG(("number_of_files = %d", count_files(directory)));

      If LOG() is deﬁned to be a no-op, count_files() will not be called—in contrast
      to the argument to a no-op function.
          The choice between turning logging on or off is typically made at compile time.
      For instance, deﬁning a preprocessor variable (say, NDEBUG for “no debugging”)
      during compilation may turn logging off.
         #if !defined(NDEBUG)
         #define LOG(args) dprintf args
         #else
         #define LOG(args) ((void) 0)
         #endif
          In addition to performance beneﬁts,macros bring a second advantage over func-
      tions: They can convey information about their own location. In C and C++, the
      macros _ _FILE_ _ and _ _LINE_ _ expand to the name of the current source ﬁle
      and the current source line,respectively.This can be used in a macro deﬁnition such
      as the following.
                                                            8.2 Logging Execution         179



   #define LOG(args) do { \
       dprintf("%s:%d: ", _ _FILE_ _, _ _LINE_ _); \
       dprintf args; \
       dprintf("\n"); } while (0)

(The do … while loop makes the macro body a single statement, for having code
such as if (debug) LOG(var); work the intended way.) If we insert a LOG()
macro in line 8 of sample.c, its logging output will automatically be preﬁxed with
the location information, as in
   sample.c:8: size = 3

   This feature of reporting the location in a macro makes it easy to trace back
the log line to its origin (such as sample.c:8 in the previous example). It can
also be leveraged to ﬁlter logs at runtime. For instance, one could set up a function
named do_we_log_this(file) that returns true if file is to be logged (by looking
up some conﬁguration resource such as an environment variable). Then, we could
introduce a conditional LOG() using:
   #define LOG(args) do { \
       if (do_we_log_this(__FILE__)) { \
           dprintf("%s:%d: ", __FILE__, __LINE__); \
           dprintf args; \
           dprintf("\n"); \
       } } while (0)

It is easy to see how these pieces fall into place to produce a set of macros and
functions that allow for easy logging of an arbitrary state—using standard formats,
with optional logging, and variable granularity. With a bit of discipline, such logging
code can even become persistent and remain in the source code. Thus, later pro-
grammers can observe the speciﬁed events just by turning on some conﬁguration
option.
    Logging functions are not just useful for making logging optional; they can also
help standardize the output of large data structures. Assume we have a very basic
linked list, deﬁned as:
   struct list {
       int elem;                   // List element
       struct list *next;          // Next node, or NULL
   };

We can create a variant of the LOG() macro to log the content of a linked list:
   #define LOG_LIST(list) do { \
       if (do_we_log_this(__FILE__)) { \
           dprintf("%s:%d: ", __FILE__, __LINE__); \
           dprintf("%s = ", #list); \
           print_list(list); \
           dprintf("\n"); \
       } } while (0)
180   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



      In a C macro, the expression #VAR expands to a string containing the macro
      argument VAR. We use this to log the variable name. If we invoke the macro as
      LOG_LIST(my_list), then #list becomes "my_list" and the log starts with
      "my_list = ." The print_list function invoked does a simple traversal of the
      list, printing its elements:
         void print_list(struct list *l)
         {
             int number_of_elems = 0;
             printf("[");

              while (l != NULL)
              {
                  if (++number_of_elems > 1)
                      printf(", ");
                  printf("%d", l->elem);
                  l = l->next;
              }
              printf("]");
         }
      Overall, LOG_LIST(my_list) thus logs something such as:
         list.c:47: my_list = [1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000]

         Any large program contains functions to output central data structures in a
      human-readable form. In C++, such functions typically overload the << operator
      such that they can write to arbitrary output streams. In JAVA, the standard is to pro-
      vide a toString() method, which returns a human-readable string for the object.

      8.2.2 Logging Frameworks
      Although many projects include their own home-grown logging facilities, there are
      also standard libraries for logging, providing a wealth of functionality seldom
      present in individual projects. As an example, consider the LOG4J framework, a
      popular logging framework for JAVA programs (also available for C, C++, C#, PERL,
      PYTHON, RUBY, and EIFFEL).
         The core idea of LOG4J is to assign each class in an application an individual or
      common logger. A logger is a component that takes a request for logging and logs it.
      Each logger has a level, from DEBUG (messages of low importance) over INFO, WARN,
      and ERROR, to FATAL (very important messages). Messages for each of these levels
      are logged by invoking the corresponding logger methods (debug(), info(), …,
      fatal()).
          Example 8.1 shows how to use a logger, using the universal UGLI interface. The
      TestLogging class initializes a logging category, named after the class in which it is
      instantiated. Then, we can use the logger methods to log individual messages. The
      TestLogging class, when executed, creates a log starting with:
             Start of main()
             A log message with level set to INFO
             A log message with level set to WARN
                                                          8.2 Logging Execution        181




EXAMPLE 8.1: A sample test ﬁle using LOG4J
import org.apache.ugli.ULogger;
import org.apache.ugli.LoggerFactory;

// How to use log4j
public class TestLogging {

         // Initialize a logger.
         final ULogger logger = LoggerFactory.getLogger(TestLogging.class);

         // Try a few logging methods
         public static void main(String args[]) {
             logger.debug("Start of main()");
             logger.info ("A log message with level set to INFO");
             logger.warn ("A log message with level set to WARN");
             logger.error("A log message with level set to ERROR");
             logger.fatal("A log message with level set to FATAL");

             new TestLogging().init();
         }

         // Try some more logging methods
         public void init() {
             java.util.Properties prop = System.getProperties();
             java.util.Enumeration enum = prop.propertyNames();

             logger.info("*** System Environment As Seen By Java ***");
             logger.debug("*** Format: PROPERTY = VALUE ***");

             while (enum.hasMoreElements()) {
                 String key = (String) enum.nextElement();
                 logger.info(key + " = " + System.getProperty(key));
             }
         }
}




          A log message with level set to ERROR
          A log message with level set to FATAL
          Calling init()
          *** System Environment As Seen By Java ***
          *** Format: PROPERTY = VALUE ***
          java.runtime.name = Java(TM) 2 Runtime Environment, Standard
          Edition
          sun.boot.library.path = /System/Library/.../1.4.2/Libraries
          java.vm.version = 1.4.2-38
    ..
     .
   The interesting thing about LOG4J is that one can customize every aspect of
the log. In particular, one can deﬁne speciﬁc logging levels for individual classes.
182   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



      For instance, one can set up LOG4J such that for the application only messages of
      level ERROR and higher are shown—except for a speciﬁc class, for which we want
      all messages of DEBUG and higher. Furthermore, one can set up speciﬁc appenders,
      which direct the log to a particular output (ﬁles, console, database, mail, servers).
      This can be done in a particular layout.
          All of this can be deﬁned at runtime using conﬁguration ﬁles. The following
      conﬁguration ﬁle deﬁnes a speciﬁc layout, where conversion patterns such as %d
      or %t insert the current time of function before the actual message (%m).
         # Set root logger level to DEBUG and its only appender to A1.
         log4j.rootLogger=DEBUG, A1

         # A1 is set to be a ConsoleAppender.
         log4j.appender.A1=org.apache.log4j.ConsoleAppender

         # A1 uses PatternLayout.
         log4j.appender.A1.layout=org.apache.log4j.PatternLayout
         log4j.appender.A1.layout.ConversionPattern=%d [%t] %-5p %c %x - %m%n

      This conﬁguration pattern changes the format of the layout to:
               2005-02-06 20:47:31,508 [main] DEBUG     TestLogging - Start of main()
               2005-02-06 20:47:31,529 [main] INFO      TestLogging - A log message
                                                         with level set to INFO
          ..
           .
      Because such log ﬁles can become painfully long, LOG4J comes with an analysis
      tool called CHAINSAW that helps to explore these logs. As seen in the screen-
      shot in Figure 8.1, searching for speciﬁc events, levels, or messages is straight-
      forward.
           LOG4J is a very powerful logging package that includes everything but the
      kitchen sink. Despite its functionality, it is easy to set up initially, and with a
      little bit of planning, scales up to very large applications. There is every rea-
      son to replace printf(), System.out.println(), and similar output methods
      with the appropriate logger calls from LOG4J and like packages for other
      languages.


      8.2.3 Logging with Aspects
      Despite their beneﬁts, logging statements still clutter the source code. The con-
      cern of logging is separate from the concern of computation—which is why most
      programmers prefer to remove logging statements once the debugging session
      is done. Some languages, though, offer an alternative: Rather than intertwining
      actual computation and logging they treat these two concerns as separate enti-
      ties called aspects. Each aspect holds only the code for its individual concern.
      A logging aspect thus holds the logging code in one syntactical entity called an
      advice.
                                                                8.2 Logging Execution   183




FIGURE 8.1
Exploring logs with CHAINSAW. Events can be sorted, ﬁltered, and shown in detail.

   The following is a small example. Suppose we have some Article class with a
buy() method.
   class Article {
      public void buy() {
         // Code
      }
   }
We want to log the execution of buy(), but without actually changing the method.
We ﬁrst write an advice—a simple piece of code logging that buy() was called.
   {
         System.out.println("Calling Article.buy()");
   }
Alternatively, we do this as a LOG4J afﬁcionado (Section 8.2.2).
   {
         logger.debug("Calling Article.buy()");
   }
   In the ASPECTJ language, we now have to specify the location at which this
advice is to be executed. This is done using a point cut—a set of locations ( join
184   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



      points) at which the previously cited advice is to be woven into the code. We name
      this point cut buyMethod().
         pointcut buyMethod():
             call(public void Article.buy());
      The advice and the point cut are combined in an aspect—for instance, an aspect
      named LogBuy.
         public aspect LogBuy {
             pointcut buyMethod():
                 call(public void Article.buy());
             before(): buyMethod() {
                 System.out.println ("Calling Article.buy()")
             }
         }
      The word before() means that the advice is to be executed before the actual call.
      We can also specify some advice to be executed after the call has completed.
         public aspect LogBuy {
             pointcut buyMethod():
                 call(public void Article.buy());
             before(): buyMethod() {
                 System.out.println ("Entering Article.buy()")
             }
             after(): buyMethod() {
                 System.out.println ("Leaving Article.buy()")
             }
         }
      Such an aspect can now be woven into the original code, resulting in an executable
      that is roughly equivalent to:
         class Article {
            public void buy() {
               System.out.println("Entering Article.buy()");
               original_buy();
               System.out.println("Leaving Article.buy()");
            }
            public void original_buy() {
               // Original code of Article.buy()
            }
         }
         Note, though, that this transformation takes place at the executable level (no
      source code is ever produced or changed). This weaving is done by the ASPECTJ
      compiler ajc, which substitutes the original JAVA compiler.
         $ ajc LogBuy.aj Shop.java
         $ java Shop
         Entering Article.buy()
         Leaving Article.buy()
         Entering Article.buy()
         Leaving Article.buy()
         ..
          .
          $ _
                                                           8.2 Logging Execution         185



Weaving in an aspect, though, is optional—that is, aspects such as LogBuy can also
be left away, effectively turning all logging off. Using the ASPECTJ compiler without
any aspects is equivalent to using the JAVA compiler alone.
    Nonetheless, you may wonder about whether specifying the aspect is worth the
hassle. After all, we need a lot of ﬁxture just to insert small advices into the code.
The interesting thing about aspects, however, is that the same advice may be woven
in at multiple locations in the program. For instance, we can specify a point cut
that encompasses all methods of the Article class.
   pointcut allMethods():
       call(public * Article.*(..));


As usual, a star is a wildcard for arbitrary names and qualiﬁers. Such a point cut can
now be used to log multiple methods,all in one place.The variable thisJoinPoint
can be used to log the name of the current method:
   public aspect LogArticle {
       pointcut allMethods():
           call(public * Article.*(..));
       before(): allMethods() {
           System.out.println ("Entering " + thisJoinPoint);
       }
       after(): allMethods() {
           System.out.println ("Leaving " + thisJoinPoint);
       }
   }

Using wildcards and other pattern expressions for class and method names, such
aspects can be easily extended to log an even greater number of methods—or even
every single method of the entire program.
   Just logging that some method was called is rarely enough. One also wants to
log the program state at the event. This is done by integrating the current object
and its parameters into the point cut such that they can be accessed in the advice.
As an example, imagine we want to log all moves of a Line object—that is, all
invocations of the Line.setPX() and Line.setPY() methods. We deﬁne a point
cut that encompasses these join points and assigns names to the object and the
argument. These names can then be used in the advice.
   public aspect LogMoves {
       pointcut setP(Line a_line, Point p):
           call(void a_line.setP*(p));

        after(Line a_line, Point p): setP(a_line, p) {
            System.out.println(a_line +
                               " moved to " + p + ".");
        }
   }

  These examples should sufﬁce to demonstrate the power of aspects when it
comes to observing facts in the program run. Aspects do not clutter the code, and
186   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



      they encourage standard formats, are optional, can be enabled at will, and can easily
      be reused. The only concern is that logging aspects must not interfere with the
      actual computation. (Note also that the general idea of having aspects not interfere
      with each other may also be central for your future aspect-oriented designs.)

      8.2.4 Logging at the Binary Level
      Aspects, as discussed in Section 8.2.3, require the source code of the program to
      be logged, and are not available for every language. An alternative is to add logging
      code not at the source code level but at the binary level—that is, we instrument
      binary code rather than source code.
         The PIN framework provided by Intel is a tool for the instrumentation of Linux
      binary executables for x86 and other Intel processors. PIN allows arbitrary C or
      C++ code to be injected at arbitrary places in the executable. It provides a rich API
      that allows us to access context information such as register content, symbol, and
      debug information. Conceptionally, you can think of PIN as aspects at the binary
      level.
          In PIN, the actual analysis tools come as so-called PIN tools. They contain the
      mechanism that decides where and what code to insert (in aspect terminology, a
      join point), as well as the code to be executed at the insertion points (in aspect
      terminology, the advice).
          Example 8.2 shows the source code of a simple PIN tool. Running this tool on
      a binary program creates a trace of all executed instructions—for instance, for the
      directory listing program /bin/ls.
         $ cd pin-2.0/ManualExamples
         $ make itrace
         $ ../Bin/pin -t itrace -- /bin/ls
         atrace.C inscount0.C _insprofiler.C              itrace.o    staticcount.C...
         $ _
         The trace of all instructions is stored in the ﬁle itrace.out.
         $ head itrace.out         # output first 10 lines
         0x40000c20
         0x40000c22
         0x40000c70
         0x40000c71
         0x40000c73
         0x40000c74
         0x40000c75
         0x40000c76
         0x40000c79
         0x40011d9b
         $ _
      Overall, 501,585 instructions were executed:
         $ wc -l itrace.out          # count lines in itrace.out
         501585
         $ _
                                                  8.2 Logging Execution   187




EXAMPLE 8.2: Logging executed instructions
// itrace.C - generate an instruction trace

#include <stdio.h>
#include "pin.H"

FILE * trace;

// This function is called before every instruction
// is executed and prints the IP
VOID printip(VOID *ip) { fprintf(trace, "%p\n", ip); }

// Pin calls this function every time
// a new instruction is encountered
VOID Instruction(INS ins, VOID *v)
{
    // Insert a call to printip before every instruction,
    // and pass it the IP
    INS_InsertCall(ins, IPOINT_BEFORE, (AFUNPTR)printip,
                  IARG_INST_PTR, IARG_END);
}

// This function is called when the application exits
VOID Fini(INT32 code, VOID *v)
{
    fprintf(trace, "#eof\n");
    fclose(trace);
}

// argc, argv are the entire command line,
// including pin -t <toolname> -- ...
int main(int argc, char * argv[])
{
    trace = fopen("itrace.out", "w");

     // Initialize pin
     PIN_Init(argc, argv);

     // Register Instruction to be called to
     // instrument instructions
     INS_AddInstrumentFunction(Instruction, 0);

     // Register Fini to be called when the
     // application exits
     PIN_AddFiniFunction(Fini, 0);

     // Start the program, never returns
     PIN_StartProgram();

     return 0;
}

Source: Cohn and Muth, 2004.
188   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



         How does this work? Let’s take a look at the code shown in Example 8.2. The
      main work is done in three functions:
         ■ The advice to be executed for each instruction is stored in the function
           printip(). The parameter ip holds the current instruction address.
         ■ The function Instruction() executes every time a new instruction I is

           encountered. It inserts printip() as a function to be executed before I .
         ■ In main(), the Instruction() function is registered as a function to

           instrument instructions.
          In addition to operating at the instruction level, the PIN framework also offers
      means of instrumenting functions (you can retrieve the address of a function, and
      add advice code to function calls or returns). Thus, it is not too difﬁcult to log a
      trace of executed functions rather than instructions. Remember the STRACE tool
      from Section 4.3.6 in Chapter 4, logging the interaction between a program and the
      operating system? With PIN, you can set up your own logging tool.



      8.3 USING DEBUGGERS
      The logging techniques discussed in Section 8.2 all require writing and integrating
      code into the program to be debugged, which takes some time—especially if you
      consider that the program has to be rerun (and frequently rebuilt) to execute the
      additional logging code. An alternative mechanism is to use an external observa-
      tion tool that hooks into the execution of the program and observes (and possibly
      manipulates) the state at speciﬁc moments in time—without changing the original
      program code in any way. This approach has a number of beneﬁts:
         ■ Getting started fast.An observation tool can be started right away,without any
           change to the source code or recompilation.
         ■ Flexible observation.It is possible to observe arbitrary aspects of the program

           execution. Typically, one can even change the aspect during execution.
         ■ Transient sessions. Observation tools are good for single shots at debugging,

           with interaction leading to quick results.
         The most important observation tools are known as debuggers—not because
      they actually remove bugs but because they are being used almost exclusively for
      debugging programs. Debuggers provide three functionalities to help you observe
      actual executions:
         ■ Execute the program and make it stop on speciﬁed conditions
         ■ Observe the state of the stopped program
         ■ Change the state of the stopped program


        An example is one of the most powerful debuggers, the GNU debugger (GDB).
      GDB is an interactive program controlled via a command line.Although your favorite
                                                            8.3 Using Debuggers         189



debugger probably comes with a graphical user interface, GDB’s command line
allows you to focus on the bare debugger functionality—applied on the sample
program (see Example 1.1).

8.3.1 A Debugging Session
As discussed earlier, the sample program is supposed to sort its arguments. How-
ever, it has a defect. When invoked with arguments 11 and 14, the output contains
a zero.
   $ sample 11 14
   Output: 0 11
   $ _
   To examine this program run in a debugger,we must ﬁrst prepare the program for
debugging (which seasoned programmers do by default). This means to have the
compiler include debugging information in the generated executable: locations,
names, and types of all variables and functions from the source code. The debugger
needs this information in order to ﬁnd out where a particular item is stored. For
GDB, debugging information is included by compiling the program with the -g
option.
   $ gcc -g -o sample sample.c
   $ _
   Next, we must load the program into the debugger. (Some debuggers also allow
you to attach them to an already-running process.) In the case of GDB, this is done
by invoking GDB with the executable as an argument.
   $ gdb sample
   GNU gdb 6.1, Copyright 2004 Free Software Foundation, Inc. ...
   (gdb) _
    The string (gdb) is GDB’s prompt, at which it accepts a number of commands.
At the time of writing,there were 135 different commands built into GDB. However,
a few sufﬁce to get acquainted. At ﬁrst, we must decide where to stop the program
such that its state can be examined. Following Hypothesis 1 from Section 6.3 in
Chapter 6, we ﬁrst predict that a[0] = 0 should hold when line 38 is being exe-
cuted. Therefore, we set a breakpoint that will make sample’s execution stop at
line 38, using the GDB break command.
   (gdb) break 37
   Breakpoint 1 at 0x1d04: file sample.c, line 38.
   (gdb) _
   Technically,a breakpoint translates into an interrupt instruction that GDB inserts
into the executable at the breakpoint location. When execution reaches the break-
point, the interrupt instruction makes the program stop and returns control to
GDB. Now we can actually run the program with the failure-inducing arguments,
using GDB’s run command.
190   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



         (gdb) run 11 14
         Starting program: sample 11 14

         Breakpoint 1, main (argc=3, argv=0xbffff9f0) at sample.c:38
         37          printf("Output: ");
         (gdb) _

      The program has stopped at line 38. Now we can examine the values of individual
      variables, using GDB’s print command.
         (gdb) print a[0]
         $1 = 0
         (gdb) _

      GDB reports that the value of a[0] is 0, which conﬁrms the initial hypothesis. (As a
      courtesy, GDB has saved the printed value in a pseudovariable $1 such that we can
      reuse it later—if we run out of zeroes, that is.)
          From here, we could now step through the execution, querying variables as we
      like. GDB provides a step and a next command that both execute the current
      line and then stop again. The difference between the two is when the current
      line is a function call: step will go to the ﬁrst line of the called function, whereas
      next will execute the called function as a whole and remain within the current
      function.
          Instead of stepping through a program without any speciﬁc target, it is better to
      formulate a hypothesis and to verify this hypothesis explicitly. Hypothesis 2 from
      Section 6.3 in Chapter 6 was that at the beginning of shell_sort, a[] = [11, 14],
      and size = 2 should hold. The following shows how we can verify this
      in GDB.
         (gdb) break shell_sort
         Breakpoint 2 at 0x1b00: file sample.c, line 9.
         (gdb) run
         The program being debugged has been started already.
         Start it from the beginning? (y or n) y
         Starting program: sample 11 14

         Breakpoint 2, shell_sort (a=0x100140, size=3) at sample.c:9
         9            int h = 1;
         (gdb) print a[0]
         $2 = 11
         (gdb) p a[1]
         $3 = 14
         (gdb) p a[2]
         $4 = 0
         (gdb) _

      (Note that we can simply type run without arguments to reuse the previous argu-
      ments, and that we can abbreviate common commands such as print to their ﬁrst
      letter p.) It turns out that size = 3 holds. Therefore, Hypothesis 2 is rejected.
                                                          8.3 Using Debuggers         191



    Hypothesis 3 from Section 6.3 in Chapter 6 states that changing size from 3
to 2 should make the run successful. We do so using GDB’s set command and use
continue to resume execution.
   (gdb) set size = 2
   (gdb) continue
   Continuing.

   Breakpoint 1, main (argc=3, argv=0xbffff9f0) at sample.c:38
   37          printf("Output: ");
   (gdb) _
Oops—our ﬁrst breakpoint is still active. We delete it and ﬁnally resume execution,
abbreviating continue to c.
   (gdb) delete 1
   (gdb) c
   Continuing.
   Output: 11 14

   Program exited normally.
   (gdb) _
   Hypothesis 3 is conﬁrmed. We have narrowed down the failure cause to one
single variable: size. Where does it get its value from? We restart the program and
use where to show the backtrace—the stack of functions that are currently active.
   (gdb) run
   Starting program: sample 11 14

   Breakpoint 2, shell_sort (a=0x100140, size=3) at sample.c:9
   9           int h = 1;
   (gdb) where
   #0 shell_sort (a=0x100140, size=3) at sample.c:9
   #1 0x00001d04 in main (argc=3, argv=0xbffff9f0) at sample.c:36
   (gdb) _
It turns out that shell_sort() (Frame #0) was invoked by main() (Frame #1). To
check the local variables of main(), we must select its stack frame—Frame #1—
using the frame command.
   (gdb) frame 1
   #1 0x00001d04 in main (argc=3, argv=0xbffff9f0) at sample.c:36
   35          shell_sort(a, argc);
   (gdb) _
This is the place from which shell_sort() was invoked, and this is the place
we have to ﬁx—by changing argc to argc --- 1 (Hypothesis 4 from Section 6.3
in Chapter 6). Many debuggers are incorporated into an editor such that one can
change the code on the ﬂy. GDB does not support this, though. Thus, we must ﬁx
sample.c with an external editor, recompile it, and rerun it.
192   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



          $ sample 11 14
          Output: 11 14
          $ _
         Our hypothesis about the failure cause is now reﬁned to a theory. At the same
      time, we have ﬁxed the defect—all in a ﬁve-minute debugger session. We have seen
      how to:
          ■ Execute the program (run) and make it stop on speciﬁed conditions (break).
          ■ Observe the state of the stopped program (print), possibly selecting a frame
            (where and frame).
          ■ Resume execution until the next stop (continue) or the next line (next,

            step).
          ■ Change the state of the stopped program (set).


        This is the basic debugger functionality,as realized in GDB and almost every other
      debugger. In the remainder of this section, we discuss other useful functionality.

      8.3.2 Controlling Execution
      A debugger allows you to control almost every aspect of the environment in which
      your program executes. This includes:
      ■   Setting of environment and conﬁguration variables:
              (gdb) set environment USER smith
              (gdb) _
      ■   Setting of signals and interrupts:
              (gdb) handle SIGINT ignore                # ignore interrupt
              (gdb) _
      ■   Hardware-speciﬁc settings such as register content:
              (gdb) set $pc = main             # resume execution at main
              (gdb) _


      8.3.3 Postmortem Debugging
      Several operating systems can be set up such that when a program crashes they
      dump its memory content to a special ﬁle. This memory dump (called a core dump
      on UNIX or a Dr.Watson ﬁle on Windows) can be read in by a debugger such that
      you may examine the state of the program at the moment it crashed.
         The most important hint of a memory dump is the backtrace, as it records the
      functions executing at the time of the crash. Suppose your fourier program crashes
      on a bus error. The default message gives no clue about what might have happened.
          $ fourier input.txt
          Bus error (core dumped)
          $ _
                                                         8.3 Using Debuggers        193



   Loading the memory dump (called core on UNIX machines) into the debugger
reveals what has happened. Using where,we can take a look at the backtrace. print
reveals the null pointer a being dereferenced.
   $ gdb fourier core
   GNU gdb 6.1, Copyright 2004 Free Software Foundation, Inc. ...
   Core was generated by ‘./fourier’.
   0x00001d8c in init_fourier (a=0x0, x=0) at fourier.c:4
   4           a[0] = x;
   (gdb) where
   #0 0x00001d8c in init_fourier (a=0x0, x=0) at fourier.c:4
   #1 0x00001de8 in main (argc=2, argv=0xbffff9e8) at fourier.c:12
   (gdb) print a
   $1 = (int *)0x0
   (gdb) _

Even if a program does not leave a memory dump, repeating the run from within
the debugger yields the same results—which is why seasoned programmers always
test their programs within a debugger.

8.3.4 Logging Data
Some debuggers allow us to execute commands automatically. In GDB,for instance,
when a breakpoint has been reached it can execute a prerecorded sequence of
commands.This can be useful for having breakpoints enable and disable each other,
and for realizing logging of variables from within the debugger.
   In GDB, using the commands command we have a breakpoint print the value of a
variable (using the GDB printf command) and then continue execution. The ﬁrst
command, silent, instructs GDB not to report a reached breakpoint.
   (gdb) break 33
   Breakpoint 1 at file sample.c, line 33.
   (gdb) commands
   Type commands for when breakpoint 1 is hit,
   one per line. End with a line saying just "end".
   >silent
   >printf "a[%d] = %d\n", i, a[i]
   >continue
   >end
   (gdb) _

When executing the program, the value of i is logged just as if we had entered an
appropriate printf command in the source code.
   (gdb) run
   Starting program: sample 7 8 9
   a[0] = 7
   a[1] = 8
   a[2] = 9
   ...
194   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



      8.3.5 Invoking Functions
      Many debuggers allow us to invoke functions of the debugged program. This is
      frequently used to invoke speciﬁc logging functions, as discussed in Section 8.2.1.
         (gdb) call print_list(my_list)
         [1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000]
         (gdb) _
      In GDB, functions can be invoked as parts of expressions, such as:
         (gdb) print proc.wired_memory() + proc.active_memory()
         2578438
         (gdb) _
          Invoking functions can interfere with normal execution of the program. For
      instance,any side effect of an invoked function affects the program being debugged.
         (gdb) call clear_list(my_list)
         (gdb) call print_list(my_list)
         []
         (gdb) _
         Some side effects are quite confusing, though. For instance, if executing the
      function reaches a breakpoint, execution will stop at the breakpoint. In such a case,
      what has happened to the original execution? How do we ﬁnish execution of our
      own invocation, and how do we resume the original execution? Even worse:What
      happens if the invoked function causes a crash? How do we ensure the original
      program is not affected? Because of such potential problems, it is wise to invoke
      only simple functions that do not interfere with the original execution.

      8.3.6 Fix and Continue
      Some debuggers, integrated within a development environment, allow you to alter
      the code of the program while it is executing. This way, you can verify whether a
      ﬁx is successful without having to alter the state explicitly, and without resuming
      execution from scratch. Be aware, though, that such ﬁxes should be limited to very
      simple changes. Anything greater creates a mismatch between source code and
      executable.

      8.3.7 Embedded Debuggers
      Traditionally, a debugger invokes the program to be debugged. However, one may
      also set up a system such that it invokes a debugger (or similar interactive facility)
      on itself. In an interpreted language such as PYTHON, for instance, you can have a
      program invoke the interactive interpreter, which allows you to explore all of the
      program’s state at will. The following is a very simple piece of code that invokes the
      interpreter in the middle of a loop by invoking the PYTHON code.interact()
      function with the local scope.
                                                             8.3 Using Debuggers          195



   import code

   for i in range(1, 10):
       print i,
       if i == 5:
           print
           code.interact("Mini Debugger - use Ctrl-D to exit",
                          None, locals())
If you execute this code, you obtain:
   $ python embedded.py
   1 2 3 4 5
   Mini Debugger - use Ctrl-D to exit
   »›X _
   In the interpreter,you can enter arbitrary expressions,which are then evaluated.
You can also invoke and evaluate arbitrary functions.
   »› print i
   5
   »› import math
   »› math.sqrt(4)
   2.0
   »› _
    Note,though,that changes to local variables may not affect the (cached) instances
in the remainder of the execution. Thus, if you enter i = 1, the i in the main
loop may remain unchanged. Once you are done exploring the state, leaving the
interpreter will resume execution of the program.
   »› (Ctrl-D)
   6 7 8 9
   $ _
    Such an embedded interactive debugging facility can be triggered by inserting
appropriate calls in the code, by enabling it from the outside, or upon speciﬁc
failure conditions. Be aware, though, that this facility is not enabled in produc-
tion code. Otherwise, bad guys will have fun gaining complete control over your
system.


8.3.8 Debugger Caveats
Despite the functionality provided by a debugger, one should keep in mind that
interactive debuggers have a certain toylike quality. That is, it is simply fascinating
for the creator to see his or her program in action and to exercise total control. This
can easily distract from solving the problem at hand. Even when working with an
interactive debugger, one should always be explicit about the current hypothesis,
and the steps required to validate it, as described in Chapter 6. Debuggers can be
excellent tools—but only when combined with good thinking.
196   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts




      8.4 QUERYING EVENTS
      Most hypotheses about a program can be tied to a speciﬁc location within the
      program, as in “at line 38, a[0] = 0 should hold.” This location is the place at
      which logging code can be inserted, at which aspects can be woven in, and at
      which a debugger user sets a breakpoint to stop execution.
          However,some hypotheses cannot be attached to such a precise location. In fact,
      the location may well be the subject of a query itself. Just imagine you ﬁnd some
      variable (say, Printer.errno) being set to a speciﬁc value at the end of a program
      run. You could now follow back Printer.errno’s dependences, as discussed in
      Chapter 7, and observe each of the locations in which Printer.errno may be set.
      You will ﬁnd, though, that in the presence of pointers there will probably be several
      such locations, and checking them all is a tedious activity. What one needs in this
      situation is a means of having the program stop at a location that is implied by a
      condition (e.g.,“the location at which Printer.errno is set”).
          Using an aspect (Section 8.2.3), this is a fairly easy task. All one needs to do is
      to deﬁne a point cut set(Printer.errno) that includes all locations in which the
      Printer.errno is set.
         public aspect LogErrno {
           pointcut setErrno():
             set(Printer.errno);

             before(): setErrno() {
               System.out.println("Old value:" + Printer.errno);
             }
             after(): setErrno() {
               System.out.println("New value:" + Printer.errno);
             }
         }
      It is fairly easy to reﬁne this aspect further—for instance, to log Printer.errno
      only if it gets a speciﬁc value.

      8.4.1 Watchpoints
      Using languages without aspect support such as C,though,we must resort to debug-
      gers to catch assignments to speciﬁc variables. GDB provides a feature called data
      breakpoints or watchpoints to catch the speciﬁc moment in time in which a given
      condition comes true. For instance, in the sample program to catch the moment in
      which a[0] is assigned use:
         (gdb) watch a[0]
         Watchpoint 3: a[0]
         (gdb) _
      Having created this watchpoint (which must be done when a[0] actually exists),
      GDB will check for each subsequent machine instruction whether the value of a[0]
      has changed. If so, GDB will stop program execution.
                                                               8.4 Querying Events         197



   (gdb) continue
   Watchpoint 3: a[0]

   Old value = 11
   New value = 0
   shell_sort (a=0x100140, size=3) at sample.c:15
   15              for (i = h; i < size; i++)
   (gdb) _
Execution has stopped at the statement after the value of a[0] has changed. The
most recent executed statement is at the end of the for loop, a[j] = v, this is
where a[0] got its zero value from.
   Watchpoints are expensive. Because the debugger must verify the value of the
watched expression after each instruction, a watchpoint implies a switch between
the debugged processes and the debugger process for each instruction step. This
slows down program execution by a factor of 1,000 or more. Fortunately, some
processors provide hardware watchpoints that can automatically monitor a small
number of locations for changes without degrading performance. Debuggers such
as GDB can make use of such hardware facilities to provide a limited number of
hardware-assisted watchpoints.
    If your program restricts access to speciﬁc data via accessor functions [such as
setX() and getX() methods in a class], it is much easier to set up a breakpoint in
these accessor functions. Languages with managed memory, such as JAVA, ensure
that no external piece of the program can modify or access data without going
through the public interface of the encapsulating class. In languages with unman-
aged memory, such as C or C++, protection is limited. It is conceivable that an exter-
nal piece of the program accesses data directly—either on purpose or by accident
(say,via a stray pointer).To catch the culprit,watchpoints can come in as a last resort.
    In some cases, one might be interested in having a program stop on a speciﬁc
condition and at a speciﬁc location. In this case, a conditional breakpoint comes
in handy—a breakpoint that stops only under certain conditions. The following is a
simple example.
   (gdb) break 37 if a[0] == 0
   Breakpoint 4 at 0x1d04: file sample.c, line 37.
   (gdb) _
Here, the breakpoint stops the program only if the given condition is met. This
is useful when checking for speciﬁc infections, such as a[0] being zero, in this
example.

8.4.2 Uniform Event Queries
The distinction among watchpoints, breakpoints, and conditional breakpoints is
purely motivated by the technique by which these concepts are implemented. One
might as well generalize these concepts to have a uniform query mechanism that
stops program execution as soon as a speciﬁc condition is met—a condition that
may involve the current execution position as arbitrary aspects of the program state.
198   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts




                  Table 8.1   Attributes in COCA
                                Events                             Data
                  Attribute    Meaning                 Attribute   Meaning
                  type         function/return . . .   name        Variable name
                  port         enter/exit              type        Type
                  func         Function name           val         Value
                  chrono       Time stamp              addr        Address
                  cdepth       Call stack              size        Size in memory
                  line         Current line            linedecl    Declaration line
                  ﬁle          Current ﬁle             ﬁledecl     Declaration ﬁle


      One such attempt was realized by the COCA debugger—a front end to GDB that
      provides a uniform query for arbitrary events during execution.
         In COCA,events and data are characterized by attributes (outlined inTable 8.1).
      These attributes can be used in queries to obtain all events or data where the query
      would be satisﬁed. A query typically consists of two parts:
      ■   Time: A query fget(attributes) denotes the subset of the execution time in
          which the given attributes hold. The query fget(func=shell_sort), for
          instance, denotes all events in which the current function is shell_sort.
      ■   Space: A query current_data(attributes) denotes the subset of the exe-
          cution data in which the given attributes hold. For example, a query
          current_data(type=int) denotes all data of which the type is int.

      If time is not speciﬁed,the query refers to the data at the current execution position.
           Within the speciﬁcation of time and space, logical variables (starting with an
      uppercase letter) can be used to match speciﬁc events. Any events that match will
      then be returned as a result of the query. (Readers familiar with PROLOG may
      recognize this style of query.) Thus, a full query at COCA’s prompt might look as
      follows.
      Which variable currently has a value of 42?
          [coca] current_var(Name, val=42).
          Name = x0
          Name = x1
          [coca] _
      Which variables are zero during execution of shell_sort()?
          [coca] fget(func=shell_sort and line=Ln),
                 current_var(Name, val=0).
          Name = a[2] Ln = int i, j;
          Name = v     Ln = int v = a[i]
          Name = a[0] Ln = a[j] = v
          [coca] _
                                                8.5 Hooking into the Interpreter        199



When did a[2] become zero?
   [coca] fget(line=Ln),
          current_var(a, val=array(---,---,0,...)).
   Ln = a = malloc(...)
   [coca] _

Internally, COCA translates all of these queries into appropriate GDB commands:
   ■   fget() sets appropriate breakpoints and executes the program.
   ■   current_var() queries the set of variables.

   Although a single query can generate several GDB commands, the general
performance issues of data queries persist. A general query such as
   fget(func=shell_sort), current_var(a[0], val=0)

still requires a watchpoint to capture the moments in which a[0] was zero.
     Overall, event and data queries as realized in COCA provide a far more general
(and far more versatile) interface than the basic debugger breakpoint and watch-
point commands. One should keep in mind, though, that queries over a wide range
of events may take a surprisingly long time to execute, because they must rely on
slow watchpoints—a surprise that does not take place when programmers must
“manually” translate their experiment into appropriate breakpoint and watchpoint
commands.




8.5 HOOKING INTO THE INTERPRETER
If one programs in a language that is interpreted (rather than compiled), one can
easily hook into the interpreter to monitor the execution for speciﬁc conditions.
Such hooks, provided for the implementation of debuggers, can also be used to
implement arbitrary observation techniques.
    In PYTHON, for instance, the embedded debugger (Section 8.3.7) is built on top
of such a hook. The PYTHON function sys.settrace(tracer) deﬁnes a tracing
function tracer that from now on will be called after every single line of execution.
It takes three arguments:
The frame. This is the stack frame of the currently executing function. The frame
  object provides access to
  ■ the currently executed code (which in turn gives access to properties like

     function name or ﬁle name),
  ■ the current line number, as well as
  ■ the local variables on the stack (which can be read and written).

The event can be call (a function is called), line (a line is executed), or return
  (a function returns).
The argument is the returned value in case of return events.
200   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



      The tracer function returns the next tracer function to be executed (typically
      itself ), or None, if tracing is to be turned off.
          Here is an example of a PYTHON tracer function that outputs a program
      trace.
         def tracer(frame, event, arg):
             code = frame.f_code
             function = code.co_name
             filename = code.co_filename
             line = frame.f_lineno
             print filename + ":" + ‘line‘ + ":" + function + "():", \
                 event, arg
             return tracer
         If this tracer is activated by calling
         sys.settrace(tracer)

         at the beginning of the program, it generates a trace like
         ./middle.py:13:middle(): call None
         ./middle.py:14:middle(): line None
         ./middle.py:15:middle(): line None
         ./middle.py:16:middle(): line None
         ./middle.py:18:middle(): line None
         ./middle.py:19:middle(): line None
         ./middle.py:26:middle(): line None
         ./middle.py:26:middle(): return 3
          Such hooks are available in all interpreted languages that offer interactive debug-
      ging facilities. The Java virtual machine ( JVM), for instance, has an interface for
      monitoring the access of object attributes. It can interrupt the execution whenever
      some speciﬁc attribute is read or written. Because the JVM is realized in software,
      there are no limits on the number of monitors,and the performance loss is not as dra-
      matic compared with debugger watchpoints. The java.lang.instrumentation
      package provides so-called Java agents who can observe and hook into arbitrary
      aspects of the execution; so-called native agents can even access the internal data
      structures as used by native methods.
          Hooks into the interpreter are the base on which all kinds of observation and
      diagnostic tools can be built. If you ever wish to implement your own technique, it
      is a good idea to ﬁrst experiment with interpreted languages, since observing and
      altering executions is so much easier. Who knows—eventually, you might be end
      up writing your own debugger!



      8.6 VISUALIZING STATE
      To close this chapter, let me present a more visual touch to observation. The tech-
      niques discussed so far all have relied on pure textual output of program states and
      variables. The following is an example of a tree node as it is being output by GDB
      and other debuggers.
                                                                   8.6 Visualizing State   201



    *tree = {value = 7, _name = 0x8049e88 "Ada",
      _left = 0x804d7d8, _right = 0x0,
      left_thread = false, right_thread = false,
      date = {day_of_week = Thu, day = 1, month = 1,
        year = 1970,
        _vptr. = 0x8049f78 Date virtual table},
      static shared = 4711}
Although textual output is useful for keeping track of scalar values,it is hardly useful
when it comes to tracking relationships between objects—especially inclusions
and references. In the previous structure, which are the elements of the date sub-
structure,for instance?Would you spot whether two pointers have the same address
and thus reference the same object?
   To improve the understanding of data structures, some debuggers allow us to
visualize these relationships. The GNU Data Display Debugger, or DDD for short, is
a graphical front end for GDB and other debuggers that provides such a visualization
(Figure 8.2).




FIGURE 8.2
The DDD debugger. In the top window, DDD has visualized a linked list.
202   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



       1:*tree
       {...}   1:*tree
                Value        = 7
                —name        = 038049 1: *tree
                — left       = 03804d Value         = 7
                —right       = 030
                                       —name        = 038049e88 "Ada"
                left—thread = false    —left        = 03804d7d8
                right—thread = false   — right      = 030
                date         = {...}   left—thread = false
                shared       = 4711    right—thread = false
                                                         day—of—week = Thu
                                                         day         = 1
                                       date        =     month       = 1
                                                         year        = 1970
                                                         —vptr.      = 0x8049f78 <Date Virtual table>
                                       shared      = 4711


      FIGURE 8.3
      Unfolding data structures in DDD.

                                                    self                      self                      self


        93:list              *() value = 85         next   value= 86          next   value = 87
                                 self = Ø⫻8Ø4d7a8          self = Ø⫻8Ø4d7b8          self = Ø⫻8Ø4d7c8
        (List *) Ø⫻8Ø4d7a8       next = Ø⫻8Ø4d7b8          next = Ø⫻8Ø4d7c8          next = Ø⫻8Ø4d7a8
                                                                  next


      FIGURE 8.4
      A linked list in DDD.

          DDD visualizes such data as a box with elements that can be unfolded at the
      user’s will (Figure 8.3). This allows the user to focus on speciﬁc parts of the data
      without cluttering the screen with irrelevant data.
          DDD displays each individual datum as a single box. However,if a box originates
      from another box,DDD creates an arrow from the origin to the target.This normally
      happens if the user dereferences a pointer. A pointer arc points from the origin (the
      pointer address) to the target (the dereferenced element). This allows for simple
      exploration and visualization of complex data structures (Figure 8.4).
          In addition to visualizing data structures and relationships, DDD can plot
      numerical values as charts, and even plot the history of individual variables. Such
      plots summarize multiple values into a single visualization, and make it easier for
      programmers to detect an uncommon state.
         All of these visualizations are limited,though,by the programmer’s ability to com-
      prehend and compare large amounts of data. If one already knows the properties of
      some infection (such as “there is a cycle somewhere in the tree”), it can be easier to
      have the computer search for these properties rather than scanning huge amounts
      of data manually. We will come back to this idea in Chapter 10.



      8.7 CONCEPTS
      When observing state, do not interfere. Know what and when to observe, and
      proceed systematically.
                                                                         8.8 Tools     203



To observe state, use:                                                                 How To
    ■ Logging functions (Section 8.2.1)
    ■ Aspects (Section 8.2.3)
    ■ A debugger (Section 8.3)

Logging statements (“printf debugging”) are easy to use,but tend to clutter the code
   and the output.
To encapsulate and reuse debugging code, use a dedicated logging framework or
   aspects.
Dedicated logging functions can be set up such that they can be turned off without
   impacting performance. With enough discipline, they can even remain in the
   production code.
Aspects offer an elegant way of keeping all logging code in one place and applying
   the same logging code to multiple places.
Debuggers allow ﬂexible and quick observation of arbitrary events. Reuse of logging
   code is difﬁcult, though.
To observe the ﬁnal state of a crashing program, use a debugger to observe the
   postmortem memory dump. If that is not available, repeat the run in a debugger.
Advanced debuggers allow ﬂexible querying of events (Section 8.4) and visualization
   of program data (Section 8.6).
To automate observation, hook into the interpreter to gain access to the entire
   program state.



8.8 TOOLS
LOG4J.The development of LOG4J started in 1996,and has seen countless enhance-
  ments and incarnations before it became the popular package it is today.
  Everything about LOG4J, as well as its ports to other languages, can be found at
  http://logging.apache.org/ .
ASPECTJ. ASPECTJ was introduced by Kiczales et al. (2001). Its Web page
  has several resources to aspect-oriented programming. It can be found at
  http://www.eclipse.org/aspectj/ .
PIN. The PIN tool for dynamic binary instrumentation is available at http://rogue.
   colorado.edu/Pin/ . The site also contains online manuals and documentation.
BCEL. For JAVA, binary instrumentation is available through BCEL, the Byte Code
  Engineering Library. It allows arbitrary manipulation of JAVA byte code,including
  inserting code to be executed before and after function calls. It can be found at
  http://jakarta.apache.org/bcel/ .
GDB. GDB was developed by Stallman and Pesch (1994),mimicking Sun’s DBX inter-
  active debugger. Its Web page is found at http://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/ .
204   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



      DDD. DDD was built by Zeller and Lütkehaus (1996) as a front end to GDB. Since
        then, it has been extended to various other command-line debuggers. The DDD
        manual was written by Zeller (2000), and is available from its Web page at
        http://www.gnu.org/software/ddd/ .
      JAVA SPIDER. Although DDD also supports JDB, the JAVA command-line debugger,
         I would not recommend it for debugging JAVA programs. If you are interested in
         visualizing the JAVA state, have a look at the JAVA SPIDER tool by Erich Gamma
         and Kent Beck, which can be found at http://sourceforge.net/projects/ javaspi-
         der/ . JAVA SPIDER is publicly available as a plug-in for the ECLIPSE programming
         environment.
      eDOBS. The eDOBS project by Geiger and Zündorf (2002) uses UML diagrams for
        visualization. It thus raises the level of abstraction from plain programming
        structures to the level of UML object diagrams. This is especially useful in
        large-scale program understanding. It can be found at http://www.se.eecs.uni-
        kassel.de/se/index.php?edobs. eDOBS also comes as an ECLIPSE plug-in.



      8.9 FURTHER READING
      To learn how debuggers such as GDB work, the book by Rosenberg (1996) gives an
      insight about the basic algorithms, data structures, and architecture of interactive
      debuggers.
          GDB allows efﬁcient watchpoints only with hardware support. As Wahbe (1992)
      points out,efﬁcient watchpoints need not necessarily be implemented in hardware,
      and suggests a software solution. His technique modiﬁes the code of the debuggee
      to monitor the instructions that might affect the watched data—with acceptable
      performance for most debugging applications.
          COCA was developed by Ducassé (1999). An efﬁcient querying concept for
      JAVA, using JAVA class instrumentation, is described in Lencevicius (2000).



      EXERCISES
      8.1 Use DDD to debug sample (see Section 1.1 in Chapter 1) as follows:
           1. Set breakpoints at lines 31, 35, and 37 by pressing the right button of your
              mouse in these lines at the left border of the source window and selecting
              “Set Breakpoint” from the resultant context menu.
           2. Run the program by selecting“Program → Run”from the menu. Insert your
              failure-producing arguments and select “Run.”
           3. The program should have stopped at line 31. Display the content of array
              a: In the argument ﬁeld, insert a[0]@5, and click on the Display button.
              (Replace 5 with an appropriate number of array ﬁelds.) Display argv in the
              same way.
                                                           8.9 Further Reading        205



            To obtain a display of variables i and argc, it may be easier to hover
        with the mouse pointer above a variable name in the source window and
        use the context menu obtained with the right mouse button.
     4. Select “Program → Continue” (or click on the Cont button on the small
        navigation window).
     5. The program should have stopped at line 35. Click on the Continue button.
     6. The program should have stopped at line 37. Click on the Continue button.
     7. The program should run to the end. To restart the program, you can simply
        click on “Run again” (or on “Run” in the small navigation window).
     Inspect the content of the variables at each breakpoint. Which variables have
     changed? When does the state become infected?
8.2 Insert logging macros into the sample program (see Section 1.1 in Chapter 1).
    Make your logging macros optional at compile time. Can you determine the
    behavior of the shell_sort() function with the log output only?
8.3 In the Chapter 5 exercises, we used a JAVA implementation of the delta debug-
    ging algorithm (Example 5.10) to simplify inputs. In this exercise,we shall use
    observation methods to trace the run.
    (a) Use LOG4J to create a trace. Log all invocations of all methods.
    (b) Using appropriate logging levels,allow users to follow the execution of:
         ■ Each test (i.e., a test is being carried out)
         ■ Each progress (i.e., the input size has been reduced)

         ■ Start and end of delta debugging only (showing the ﬁnal result)

    (c) Use aspects to create a trace on the console:
         ■ Log all invocations of all methods. Use separate aspects for different

           methods.
         ■ Extend your example to use LOG4J.

    (d) Modify the example in Example 8.2 such that it computes an execution
         proﬁle—that is, it records for each instruction how often it was executed.
8.4 You would like to examine a program run as soon as one of the following
    holds:
    ■ Function foo() is reached
    ■ Variable a[0] is equal to 2
    ■ foo() is reached and a[0] is equal to 2
    ■ foo() is reached or a[0] is equal to 2
    ■ foo() is reached and at least one of a[0], a[1], …, a[99] is equal to 2
    ■ All of a[0], a[1], …, a[99] are equal to 2



     Assume that the processor has no special debugging support, except for
     changing individual machine instructions into interrupt instructions.
     (a) Sort these queries according to the execution speed of the examined
         program. Start with the fastest.
206   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts



           (b) Sketch processor support that can make these queries more efﬁcient.
           (c) Sketch possible code instrumentation (e.g., adding new code at compila-
               tion time) that makes these queries more efﬁcient.
      8.5 When stopping a program, the current backtrace is a summary of how your
          program got where it is. It is a sequence of frames, where each frame holds the
          execution context of a called function. The backtrace starts with the currently
          executing frame (frame 0), followed by its caller (frame 1), and on up the
          stack. The following is an example of a backtrace, showing the innermost
          three frames.
               #0   m4_traceon (obs=0x24eb0, argc=1, argv=0x2b8c8)
                    at builtin.c:993
               #1   0x6e38 in expand_macro (sym=0x2b600) at macro.c:242
               #2   0x6840 in expand_token (obs=0x0, t=177664, td=0xf7fffb08)
                    at macro.c:71
           Suppose you have a given backtrace as an array of function names. For
           instance:
               backtrace[0] == "m4_traceon"
               backtrace[1] == "expand_macro"
               backtrace[2] == "expand_token"
           Your task is to instrument a debugger such that the program being exam-
           ined stops as soon as a speciﬁc backtrace or its superset is reached. In
           this backtrace, the program should stop as soon as m4_traceon is reached
           while expand_macro is active, where expand_macro was reached while
           expand_token was active. To instrument the debugger, you can use the
           following functions:
           ■ set_breakpoint( function, ENTER/EXIT|) sets a breakpoint such that

              execution stops when entering/exiting the function function. It returns
              a unique number for each created breakpoint.
           ■ delete_breakpoint(bp_nr) deletes the breakpoint number bp_nr.

           ■ continue() starts or resumes execution until the next breakpoint is

              reached. It returns the number of the reached breakpoint.
              Example: To make the program stop as soon as "m4_traceon" is entered,
              use the following.
               m4_bp = set_breakpoint("m4_traceon", ENTER);
               do {
                    bp = continue();
               } while (bp != m4_bp);
               delete_breakpoint(m4_bp);
           Design an algorithm in C-like pseudocode that uses the previous functions to
           make a program stop at a speciﬁc backtrace. Be sure to comment your work.
                                                          8.9 Further Reading       207



8.6   Mystery time! When being executed on Mac OS, the bigbang program shown
      in Example 8.3 is reported to hang up after issuing the result (rather than
      terminating normally).
          $ bigbang
          result is: 2
          Interrupting execution
          $ _
      What’s wrong with this program?
      (a) Use logging functions to log the program state. Use a dedicated method
          for each class.
      (b) Use GDB or another interactive debugger to examine the run.
      (c) Use DDD to visualize the relationships between the individual elements.
         Document all of your steps in a logbook (see Section 6.5 in Chapter 6).




EXAMPLE 8.3: The bigbang program. The Container class is deﬁned in
Example 8.4. The Element class is shown in Example 8.5
 1    #include <iostream>
 2    using namespace std;
 3
 4    #include "Element.h"
 5    #include "Container.h"
 6
 7     bool mode = true;        // (1)
 8
 9    int main (int argc, char *argv[]) {
10         Element *a = new Element(1);
11         Element *b = new Element(2);
12         a->setPeer(b);
13         b->setPeer(a);
14         a->doSomeStuff();
15
16          Container *c = new Container(10, mode);
17          // c->add(b); // (2)
18          c->add(a);
19          c->add(b);
20
21          cout << "result is: " << c->processElements() << ’\n’;
22
23          delete c;
24          return 0;
25    }
208   CHAPTER 8 Observing Facts




      EXAMPLE 8.4: The Container.h ﬁle for the bigbang program
       1 #ifndef MY_CONTAINER_H
       2 #define MY_CONTAINER_H
       3
       4 #include "Element.h"
       5
       6 class Container {
       7 private:
       8        bool deleteElements;
       9        int size;
      10        Element **elements;
      11
      12 public:
      13        Container(int sz, bool del)
      14          : size(sz), deleteElements(del)
      15        {
      16           elements = new Element *[size];
      17           for (int i = 0; i < size; i++)
      18              elements[i] = 0;
      19        }
      20        int processElements() {
      21             int sum = 0;
      22             for (int i = 0; i < size; i++)
      23                   if (elements[i])
      24                        sum += elements[i]->getData();
      25
      26             return sum;
      27        }
      28        bool add(Element* e) {
      29           for (int i = 0; i < size; i++)
      30              if (elements[i] == 0) {
      31                  elements[i] = e;
      32                  return true;
      33              }
      34
      35           return false;
      36        }
      37        virtual ˜Container () {
      38           if (deleteElements)
      39             for (int i = 0; i < size; i++)
      40                delete elements[i];
      41
      42           delete elements;
      43        }
      44 };
      45 #endif
                                                            8.9 Further Reading    209




EXAMPLE 8.5: The Element.h file for the bigbang program
 1   #ifndef _ELEMENT_H
 2   #define _ELEMENT_H
 3
 4   class Element {
 5        int data;
 6        Element *peer;
 7
 8   public:
 9        Element (int d)
10          : data(d), peer(0)
11        {}
12
13        int getData ()            { return data; }
14        void setPeer (Element *p) { peer = p; }
15        void resetPeer ()         { peer = 0; }
16
17        void doSomeStuff () {
18             if (peer != 0) {
19                 delete peer;
20                 resetPeer();
21             }
22        }
23
24        virtual ˜Element () {
25           if (peer != 0 && peer->peer == this) {
26               peer->resetPeer();
27             }
28        }
29   };
30
31   #endif




 “If a program can’t rewrite its own code,” he asked, “what good is it?”
                                                                     – ED NATHER
                                                         The Story of Mel (1983)
                                                                       CHAPTER


Tracking Origins
                                                                         9
Once we have observed an infection during debugging, we need to discover its
origin. In this chapter, we discuss omniscient debugging, a technique that records
an entire execution history such that the user can explore arbitrary moments in time
without ever restarting the program. Furthermore, we explore dynamic slicing, a
technique that tracks the origins of speciﬁc values.



9.1 REASONING BACKWARD
A common issue with observation tools, as discussed in Chapter 8, Observing Facts,
is that they execute the program forward in time, whereas the programmer must
reason backward in time. Applied to interactive debugging tools, this means that
the programmer must carefully approach the moment in time where the infection
is observable. As soon as the infection is found, he or she must restart the program
and stop at some earlier moment in time to explore the previous state.
    Restoring the steps to get to the earlier state can be pretty time consuming—and
if we go just one step too far, the program must be restarted anew. One key issue
for (human) debuggers is thus how to ease the task of discovering the origin of
a value, and how to keep a memory of what was going on during the run. Here,
we ask:

  WHERE DOES THIS VALUE COME FROM?




9.2 EXPLORING EXECUTION HISTORY
So you want to support the programmer in examining the history? One ﬁrst idea
would be to have a means of undoing the last execution steps. An even better idea
is to explore the entire execution history backward. In other words, we record the
execution—every single change to every single aspect of the state.
    This radical idea has been realized under the name of omniscient debugging in a
number of recent debuggers. Rather than accessing the program while it is running,     211
212   CHAPTER 9 Tracking Origins




      FIGURE 9.1
      Exploring execution history in ODB. Users can navigate backward and forward through the
      execution, and along events related to variables, statements, and outputs.


      an omniscient debugger ﬁrst executes the program and records it. Once the run is
      complete, the omniscient debugger loads the recording and makes it available for
      observation.
          Figure 9.1 shows the ODB debugger for JAVA, a prototype that pioneered and
      proved the concept. At the center of ODB, one can see the traditional source code
      window, highlighting the current execution position. The other windows show
      more of the program state,such as current threads,the stack content,variable values,
      the console output, and so on.
          Using the arrow buttons above the source code window, one can step through
      the program’s execution. In contrast to ordinary debuggers, though, ODB also
      features buttons to step backward through the execution. As one walks back in
      time, all windows are synchronized properly. If you step before an assignment, the
      variable value shown will go back to the earlier value, and if you step before an
      output statement, the appropriate output will disappear from the console.
          In addition to stepping backward and forward along program lines, one can step
      back and forth between time stamps speciﬁc to the individual windows. In the
      code window, each moment of line execution has a time stamp (nothing special
      here). In the data window, though, time stamps correspond to value changes of
      the displayed variables. To ﬁnd out when array[] was last changed, you can select
      array[] in the window listing the variable values, and then use the buttons above
                                                              9.3 Dynamic Slicing        213



that window to walk back and forth in the value history. Variables with a value
that has changed from the previously shown time stamp are highlighted with a
leading *.
    Each time an earlier point in the execution history is reached, the other win-
dows synchronize as well. Therefore, one sees the previous value and the line that
assigned the value, as well as every other aspect of the current state. In addition to
stepping through events, the programmer can issue event queries (as discussed in
Section 8.4.2 in Chapter 8) and thus directly jump to speciﬁc events. ( In contrast
to COCA,though,ODB does not need to renew the execution,which makes querying
much faster.) A typical debugging session using ODB proceeds as follows:
   1. Start with the failure, as reported in the console window. Clicking on the
      output will lead to the moment in time the output was produced—that is,the
      output statement will be shown in the code window.
   2. Step backward, searching the infection at each point.
   3. Follow the infection back to the defect.
   The main drawback, of course, is that recording all state changes is expensive.
First, recording adds a certain overhead, such that a typical program will be slowed
down by a factor of 10 or more. Second, recording needs memory—a lot of it. ODB
generates data at the rate of 100 MB per second, meaning that a 2-GB address space
will ﬁll up in 20 seconds. To deal with the memory issue, one can
   ■ record speciﬁc events only (such as the last second before the failure, or
     whatever ﬁts into memory),
   ■ record speciﬁc parts of the system only (we do not care what is going on in

     the runtime library), or
   ■ use a compressed storage of the individual events.


   All in all, though, the advantages far outweigh the disadvantages. Using omni-
scient debugging, the programmer has random access to every moment in time
and every aspect of the execution, without ever needing to restart the program—
a tremendous advantage over ordinary interactive debuggers. It is not unlikely
that omniscient debugging will become a standard feature of future interactive
debuggers.




9.3 DYNAMIC SLICING
Although omniscient debugging is handy for accessing every aspect of a program
execution, the programmer still has to ﬁgure out how the individual values came
to be. This is where dependences come in handy, as discussed in Chapter 7. If we
know that the bad value of variable A can only come from variable B at some earlier
moment in time, we can immediately focus on B. A good programmer would thus
use both observation (of the program run) and deduction (from the program code)
to quickly progress toward the defect.
214   CHAPTER 9 Tracking Origins



          Chapter 7 treated dependences in an abstract way—that is, we explored depen-
      dences as they hold for arbitrary runs of the program. When debugging, we have a
      concrete failing run at hand, and we would like to know the dependences for this
      concrete run in order to trace back origins.
          This is where the technique of dynamic slicing comes in handy. Like a static
      slice, a dynamic slice encompasses a part of the program—that is, the part of the
      program that could have inﬂuenced (or could be inﬂuenced by) a speciﬁc variable
      at some point. However, a dynamic slice does not hold for all possible runs but for
      one single concrete run.
          As an example of a static versus a dynamic slice, consider the program shown in
      Example 9.1.The static backward slice (a) of s,being output in line 15,encompasses
      the entire program (try it!). The dynamic slice in (b) applies to the run in which n
      and a are read in as 2 and 0, respectively. Note that a large number of statements
      has no effect on the ﬁnal value of s. The dynamic slice for the run is more precise
      than the static slice for the entire program.
          How can a slice as shown in Example 9.1 be computed? To compute a dynamic
      slice, one requires a trace—a list of statements in the order they were executed
      during the concrete run. Such a trace is either created by instrumenting the
      program—that is, having the compiler or another tool embed special tracing
      commands—or by running the program in an interpreter. The leftmost column
      of Example 9.2 shows the trace of statements from the run n = 2, a = 0 in
      Example 9.1(b).
          In this trace, one records the variables that were read and written—just as in
      Table 7.1, except that now the effects are recorded for each statement as it is
      executed. In addition, one introduces a predicate pseudovariable for each predi-
      cate that controls execution (such as p8 for the predicate i <= n in line 8). Each of


      EXAMPLE 9.1: Static and dynamic slices

         1 n = read();                         1 n = read(); // 2
         2 a = read();                         2 a = read(); // 0
         3 x = 1;                              3 x = 1;
         4 b = a + x;                          4 b = a + x;
         5 a = a + 1;                          5 a = a + 1;
         6 i = 1;                              6 i = 1;
         7 s = 0;                              7 s = 0;
         8 while (i <= n) {                    8 while (i <= n) {
         9     if (b > 0)                      9     if (b > 0)
        10         if (a > 1)                 10         if (a > 1)
        11             x = 2;                 11             x = 2;
        12     s = s + x;                     12     s = s + x;
        13     i = i + 1;                     13     i = i + 1;
        14 }                                  14 }
        15 write(s);                          15 write(s);

      (a) Static slice for s                (b) Dynamic slice for s
                                                                    9.3 Dynamic Slicing   215




EXAMPLE 9.2: Computing a dynamic slice from a trace
Trace                      Write Read              Dynamic Slice

 1 n = read();                  n
 2 a = read();                  a
 3 x = 1;                       x
 4 b = a + x;                   b           a, x           2, 3
 5 a = a + 1;                   a           a              2
 6 i = 1;                       i
 7 s = 0;                       s
 8 while (i <= n) {             p8          i, n           6, 1
 9    if (b > 0)                p9          b, p8          2, 3, 6, 1, 4, 8
10        if (a > 1)            p10         a, p9          2, 3, 6, 1, 4, 8, 5, 9
12    s = s + x;                s           s, x, p8       6, 1, 7, 3, 8
13    i = i + 1;                i           i, p8          6, 1, 8
 8 while (i <= n) {             p8          i, n           6, 1, 8, 13
 9    if (b > 0)                p9          b, p8          2, 3, 6, 1, 4, 8, 13
10        if (a > 1)            p10         a, p9          2, 3, 6, 1, 4, 8, 5, 9, 13
12    s = s + x;                s           s, x, p8       6, 1, 7, 3, 8, 13, 12
13    i = i + 1;                i           i, p8          6, 1, 8, 13
 8 while (i <= n) {             p8          i, n           6, 1, 8, 13
15 write(s);                    o15         s              6, 1, 7, 3, 8, 13, 12


these pseudovariables is “written” by the statement that controls execution and
“read” by the statements that are controlled. Example 9.2 shows the effects of the
individual statements.
    From these effects, one can now compute dynamic slices by following the read/
write dependences. The following is a method that computes all dynamic slices for
all written values at once.
1. For each write w to a variable, assign an empty dynamic slice.
                                      DynSlice(w) ⫽ ∅
2. Proceed forward through the trace (or execute the program, generating the
   trace). Whenever a value w is written, consider all variables ri read in that state-
   ment. For each ri , consider the line line(ri ) where ri was last written, as well
   as its dynamic slice DynSlice(ri ). Compute the union of these lines and slices
   and assign it to the write of w.
                                                                      
                       DynSlice(w) ⫽         DynSlice(ri ) ∪ {line(ri )}
                                        i
   As an example, consider the dynamic slice of line 4, DynSlice(4). In line 4, b =
   a + x, variable b is written and variables a and x are read, last written in lines
   2 and 3, respectively. Therefore, the dynamic slice of b in line 4 is the union of
   ■ the dynamic slice of a in line 2 (empty),

   ■ the dynamic slice of x in line 3 (empty), and
   ■ lines 2 and 3.
216   CHAPTER 9 Tracking Origins



          Formally, this reads:

                           DynSlice(4) ⫽ DynSlice(2) ∪ {2} ∪ DynSlice(3) ∪ {3}
                                       ⫽ ∅ ∪ {2} ∪ ∅ ∪ {3}
                                       ⫽ {2, 3}

      3. At the end of the execution, all deﬁnitions will be assigned a slice that holds all
         origins of all values.
          As an example, consider the right column in Example 9.2, showing the dynamic
      slices as they are computed along the trace. (Values in bold indicate new additions
      to the slices.) The last line shows the dynamic backward slice for s in the statement
      write(s). These are exactly the lines highlighted in Example 9.2.
          On average, dynamic slices are far more precise than static slices. In a concrete
      run, all locations of all variables—including those in computed expressions such
      as a[i] or *p—are known, eliminating conservative approximation. Likewise, in a
      concrete run paths that were not taken need not be taken into account.
          All in all, this makes dynamic slices smaller than static slices. Whereas a
      static backward slice typically encompasses 30 percent of a program’s statements,
      a dynamic slice only encompasses 5 percent of the executed statements (note
      that the executed statements also form a subset of all statements). The increased
      precision comes at a price, though:
      ■ Overhead. Dynamic slices depend on a trace of the program, which is difﬁcult
        to obtain efﬁciently. Although we need not record the entire value history (as in
        omniscient debugging), we still need to record which statements were taken in
        which order.
      ■ Lack of generality. Dynamic slices only apply to a single run of the program, and

        thus cannot be reused for other runs (in contrast to program-dependence graphs
        and static slices, which are valid for all runs).



      9.4 LEVERAGING ORIGINS
      How can dynamic slices be used in a debugger? This was explored by Ko and Myers
      (2004) in the WHYLINE system. WHYLINE stands for Workspace that Helps You
      Link Instructions to Numbers and Events.” It is a debugger whereby programmers
      can ask questions about why things happened,and why other things did not happen.
      In short, it is a debugger whereby you can ask: “Why did my program fail?”
          The WHYLINE originally was designed for the ALICE language—a simple lan-
      guage in which three-dimensional objects can be deﬁned and manipulated. ALICE
      is designed for novices learning programming. In the programming environment,
      users select and compose ALICE statements interactively rather than entering them
      as text. Nonetheless,ALICE is just as powerful as any other programming language.
                                                           9.4 Leveraging Origins   217



    In Figure 9.2, we see a screenshot from a student’s debugging session. In a
PACMAN program,the protagonist Pac has collided with a ghost,but does not shrink
as it should. The student uses the WHYLINE for debugging the program. In the
center window, we see the code that should resize Pac by 0.5.
   if both Pac is within 2 meters of Ghost and
       not Big Dot.isEaten:
       Pac resize 0.5
However,this resizing code is not being executed.To ﬁnd out why the branch is not
taken,the student has clicked on the Why button. From a menu (Figure 9.3),she has
opted to ask why Pac resize 0.5 was not executed.
    The WHYLINE ’s answer is shown at the bottom of Figure 9.2. The diagnosis
comes as a chain of dependences ending at the else branch ( ), consisting of the
following events:
   1. Big Dot.isEaten is set to true.
   2. Therefore, the isEaten variable is true.
   3. The negation not (from the previous code) is false.
   4. Although Pac is within 2 meters of Ghost is true.
   5. The and conjunction (from the previous code) evaluates to false.
   6. Therefore, the else clause is taken.




FIGURE 9.2
Asking “Why didn’t…?” questions in the WHYLINE. Source: Ko and Myers 2004.
218   CHAPTER 9 Tracking Origins




      FIGURE 9.3
      Selecting a question in the WHYLINE . At the bottom, the diagnosis shows why a speciﬁc piece
      of code was not executed. Source: Ko and Myers, 2004.


         The student can further explore this diagnosis by scrubbing a time cursor over
      the dependency chain and thus access arbitrary moments in time, just as in omni-
      scient debugging. When she moves the cursor over the Big Dot.isEaten set
      to true bubble,the code window shows the code in which the Big Dot.isEaten
      variable is set.
         All of this is just correct behavior. It turns out that Pac did not resize simply
      because he had eaten a big dot before, making him immune against ghost attacks.
      (Rather than Pac being resized, one should see the ghost being eaten!)
          How does the WHYLINE compute its diagnosis? The answer is simple: All the
      WHYLINE does is compute a dynamic backward slice of the queried property.
      More precisely, the following are the strategies that WHYLINE uses:
      “Why did…?” questions. For a “Why did…?” question, the WHYLINE shows the
        dynamic backward slice from the queried statement S. That is, it would show
        all statements P is dependent on. The slice is limited to two such statements. If
        needed, the programmer can query again about a speciﬁc statement.
            As an example, consider the slices shown in Example 9.1 and the question
        “Why did s = 2 in line 15?” The WHYLINE strategy would point to
         ■   “s = 1” from line 12 (s = s + x), the direct origin of s, as well as
         ■   “i = 2” from line 8 (i <= n), which controls execution of line 12.
         (Instead of line 8, the WHYLINE strategy could also point to line 3 (x = 1), the
         origin of x.) If needed, the programmer can further explore the origins by
         querying why one of these statements was executed.
      “Why didn’t…?” questions. For a “Why didn’t…?” question, the WHYLINE would
        use the static backward slice of the statement S, and by following back the
                                                   9.5 Tracking Down Infections        219



   control dependences, retrieve those statements that directly prevented execu-
   tion. It then performs the “Why did…?” question on each.
      As an example, let’s ask the question “Why didn’t x = 2 in line 11?” Follow-
   ing the static dependences, we have three control dependences from line 11
   to lines 8, 9, and 10, respectively. Assume the WHYLINE asks the “Why did…?”
   question only for the closest one, line 10 (if (a > 1)). As an answer, it would
   then present
   ■   “a = 1” from line 5 (a = a + 1), as well as
   ■   “b = 1” from line 9 (if (b > 0)), the statement directly controlling line 5.
   Again, the programmer could interactively query the WHYLINE about how these
   values came to be.
    Overall, the WHYLINE demonstrates what can be done in a modern debugger. It
incorporates random access in time (as in omniscient debugging) as well as static
and dynamic slicing to trace origins. By limiting the slice length, it prevents the
programmer from having to deal with too many possible origins, and allows explo-
ration along the dependences. Finally, it shows how to package it all in a nice user
interface, avoiding the use of program analysis jargon such as “dependences” or
“slices.” A study conducted by Ko and Myers (2004) showed that the WHYLINE
could decrease debugging time by nearly a factor of 8, highlighting the potential of
modern debugging environments.
    As of 2008, the WHYLINE is also available for JAVA programs, targeting expert
developers, and achieving all of the original WHYLINE contributions “without limi-
tations on the target program, other than that it uses standard I/O mechanisms and
that the program does not run too long” (Ko and Myers, 2008). The WHYLINE for
JAVA allows programmers to ask speciﬁc questions on the output of the program:
“Why is this line blue?” or “Why did this error message show up?” In a user study,
the WHYLINE participants were more than twice as fast as the experts without the
WHYLINE—showing off the potential of program-analysis techniques when coming
in an easy-to-use and intuitive package.



9.5 TRACKING DOWN INFECTIONS
Even with all of the advanced observation tools discussed in this chapter, we still
need a strategy for using them systematically. The following is a general strategy
that combines observation and dependences to narrow down arbitrary infection
sites—that is, a strategy for locating arbitrary defects.
1. Start with the infected value as reported by the failure. In the sample program
   (Example 1.1), this would be a[0].
2. Follow back the dependences to potential origins. This can be done using
   ■ static dependences, as discussed in Chapter 7, or
   ■ dynamic dependences, as discussed in Section 9.3.
 220      CHAPTER 9 Tracking Origins



             Following the data dependences in sample, we can trace back the value of a[0]
             to other values in a[] as well as to size.
         3. Observe the origins and judge whether the individual origins are infected or not.
            In the sample run, we ﬁnd that size is infected (it has the wrong value).
         4. If you ﬁnd an earlier infected value, repeat steps 2 and 3 to track its origins. In
            sample, the value of size depends on argc (and only on argc).
         5. When you ﬁnd an infected value V where all values that V depends on are sane,
            you have found the infection site—in other words, the defect. argc is sane, but
            size is not. Thus, the infection must have taken place at the assignment of argc
            to size—at the function call to shell_sort().
         6. Fix the defect, and verify that the failure no longer occurs. This ensures that you
            have found the defect that caused the failure in question.
             This strategy is in fact an application of scientiﬁc method (see Chapter 6) that
          creates hypotheses along the dependences, and uses observation to assess possible
          origins. It also guarantees that you will ﬁnd the infection site, just by observation
          and judgment. It even works when dependences are imprecise or even unknown.
          In such cases, there is more to observe and more to judge, of course.
              However, the amount of data to be observed and to be judged can still be
          enormous. We must still ease the task. In particular, we can:
             ■ Help the programmer judge whether some origin is infected.This can be done
               using assertion techniques, discussed in Chapter 10.
             ■ Help the programmer focus on speciﬁc origins. Such origins include anoma-

               lies (discussed in Chapter 11) and actual failure causes (discussed in
               Chapters 13 and 14).
             Stay tuned—there is more to come.



          9.6 CONCEPTS
How To To explore execution history, use an omniscient debugger, which records the
           entire execution of a program and grants random access to every aspect of the
           execution.
       To isolate value origins for a speciﬁc run, use dynamic slicing.
         Dynamic slices apply only to a single run of the program, but are far more precise
             than static slices.
         The best available interactive debuggers leverage omniscient debugging, static slic-
             ing,and dynamic slicing to provide diagnoses about why things happen and why
             they do not.
         To track down an infection, follow back the dependences and observe the origins,
             repeating the process for infected origins (see Section 7.3 in Chapter 7).
                                                           9.8 Further Reading        221




9.7 TOOLS
Dynamic Slicers. Very few dynamic slicers are publicly available.Abhik Roychoud-
  hury at the University of Singapore and his team have published JSLICE,a dynamic
  slicer for JAVA programs: http://jslice.sourceforge.net/ . Clemens Hammacher at
  Saarland University has implemented JAVASLICER, a dynamic slicing framework
  for JAVA. JAVASLICER speciﬁcally focuses on usability, separation of tracing and
  slicing, and accuracy: http://www.st.cs.uni-saarland.de/javaslicer/ .
ODB. The ODB debugger was developed by Lewis (2003), who also coined the
  term omniscient debugging. ODB is available at: http://www.lambdacs.com/
  debugger/debugger.html. Commercial implementations of omniscient debug-
  ging include Visicomp’s RETROVUE and Omnicore’s CODEGUIDE.
WHYLINE. The WHYLINE for JAVA is available for download via Andrew Ko’s
  home page at http://faculty.washington.edu/ajko/whyline-java.shtml.




9.8 FURTHER READING
Dynamic slicing was invented independently by Korel and Laski (1990) and by
Agrawal and Horgan (1990). The computation method in this chapter follows
Gyimóthy et al. (1999). Still, the main challenge of dynamic slicing is efﬁciency.
Zhang and Gupta (2004) offer several interesting approaches to the subject, as well
as an extensive overview on the literature.
    An interesting variant of dynamic slicing is critical slicing, as realized by
DeMillo et al. (1996) in the SPYDER debugger. Critical slicing is based on the idea
of removing individual statements from the program and to leave only those state-
ments relevant to the error. As DeMillo et al. (1996) point out, this reduces the
average program by 64 percent.
   The original WHYLINE version was presented by Ko and Myers (2004); the JAVA
version is discussed in Ko and Myers (2008). The paper by Ko and Myers (2009)
focuses on the design rationales and gives substantial insights on how to make a
debugger user friendly for real developers.




EXERCISES
9.1 In the exercises of Chapter 5, we used a JAVA implementation of the delta
    debugging algorithm (Example 5.10) to simplify inputs. Download and use
    ODB to debug the run.
9.2 Compute the dynamic slices for the run sample 11 14 for the sample
    program (Example 1.1).
222   CHAPTER 9 Tracking Origins



      9.3 Using the WHYLINE strategies, answer the following questions for the run
          sample 11 14:
           (a) Why is a[0] = 0 at line 38?
           (b) Why is line 22 not executed in the ﬁrst iteration of the for loop in line 16?
      9.4 The following program is supposed to determine the greatest common divisor.
            01    int gcd(int a, int b)
            02    {
            03        int d = b;                   S   D1   D2   ⌬
            04        int r = a % b;               S   D1   D2   ⌬
            05
            06         while(r > 0)                S   D1   D2   ⌬
            07         {
            08             int n = d;              S   D1   D2   ⌬
            09             d = r;                  S   D1   D2   ⌬
            10             r = n / d;              S   D1   D2   ⌬
            11         }
            12
            13         return d;                   S   D1   D2   ⌬
            14    }

          This program has a defect: gcd(2, 6) returns 3, but 3 is not a divisor of 2.
          The defect is in line 10: it should read r = n % d.
          (a) Determine the static backward slice of d (in line 13). Check S for all
              statements that are part of the slice.
          (b) Determine the dynamic backward slice of d in the run gcd(2, 6). Check
               D1 for all statements that are part of the slice.
          (c) Determine the dynamic backward slice of d in the run gcd(0, 5). Check
               D2 for all statements that are part of the slice.
          (d) Determine the difference between the slices in steps 2 and 3. Check ⌬
              for all statements that are part of the difference.
          (e) “A difference as obtained in step 4 always contains the faulty statement.”
              Give a program and two slices that contradict this claim.




       Life can only be understood backwards, but it must be lived forwards.

                                                              – SØREN AABYE KIERKEGAARD
                                                                           Diary (1843)
                                                                                  CHAPTER


Asserting Expectations
                                                                         10
Observation alone is not enough for debugging. One must compare the observed
facts with the expected program behavior. In this chapter, we discuss how to auto-
mate such comparisons,using well-known assertion techniques. We also show how
to ensure the sanity of important system components such as memory.



10.1 AUTOMATING OBSERVATION
Observing what is going on in a program can be a burden for a programmer. First,
there are many states and events that can and must be observed. Second, for each
new run (or each new defect) the same items must be observed again. The bur-
den is not so much the observation itself but the act of judging whether the
observed state is sane or not—which of course multiplies with the amount of data
observed.
   In the past, where computing time was expensive, having such judging done
by humans was commonplace (see Bug Story 9, for instance). Given our current
wealth of computing power, though, it becomes more and more reasonable to shift



  BUG STORY 9
  Examining a Lot of Data
  Holberger drives into Westborough.The sun is in his eyes this morning,and he wonders
  in a detached sort of way where it will be hitting his windshield when they ﬁnish this
  job. Debugging Eagle has the feel of a career in itself. Holberger isn’t thinking about any
  one problem, but about all the various problems at once, as he walks into the lab. What
  greets him there surprises him. He shows it by smiling wryly. A great heap of paper
  lies on the ﬂoor, a continuous sheet of computer paper streaming out of the carriage at
  Gollum’s system console. Stretched out, the sheet would run across the room and back
  again several times. You could ﬁt a fairly detailed description of American history from
  the Civil War to the present on it. Veres sits in this midst of this chaos, the picture of a
  scholar. He’s examined it all. He turns to Holberger. “I found it,” he says.
  Source: Kidder (1981).                                                                         223
224   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



                                  Variables                          Variables




                     Time                              Time




                                     (a)                               ( b)

      FIGURE 10.1
      Observation (a) versus assertion (b). Whereas observation is limited to small probes in space
      and time, assertions can automatically cover a large area.

      the burden of observation over to the computer—that is, to have the computer
      check whether the program state is still sane,or whether an infection has occurred.
      This is the same approach as in automated testing (Chapter 3). Rather than observe
      and judge for ourselves, we have the program test its own state continuously.
         The ﬁrst advantage of automated observation is scalability.In contrast to manual
      observation, where we can only examine a small number of variable values during
      execution (Figure 10.1a),having the computer observe and judge allows us to check
      large parts of the execution automatically (Figure 10.1b). Each automated observa-
      tion acts like an infection detector, catching infections before they can propagate
      and obscure their origins. This effectively narrows down possible infection sites,
      and thus speeds up debugging.
         The second advantage is, of course, persistence. Once we have speciﬁed the
      properties of a sane state,we can reuse this speciﬁcation over and over again.This not
      only includes debugging but documentation and general program understanding.
      Of all debugging techniques, expressing and checking what a program is supposed
      to do is probably the best long-term investment in code quality. Let’s thus explore
      some common assertion techniques. Here, we ask:

        HOW DO WE AUTOMATE OBSERVATION?




      10.2 BASIC ASSERTIONS
      To have the program ensure its sane state automatically is deceptively simple. The
      basic idea is to insert appropriate code that checks for infections. For instance, to
      ensure that a divisor is nonzero, one could write:
                                                            10.2 Basic Assertions        225



   if (divisor == 0) {
       printf("Division by zero!");
       abort();    // or some other exceptional behavior
   }
    Such infection-handling code has been used since the dawn of computing. It
is common and useful—and yet somewhat clumsy. As discussed in Section 8.2 in
Chapter 8, it is wise to explicitly separate code concerned with debugging from the
normal program code. One way to do so is to have a special function that explicitly
checks for a speciﬁc condition.The common name of such a function is assert(x),
with the functionality that it aborts execution if x should be false.
   assert(divisor != 0);

   The assert() function could be implemented in a straightforward way, as in:
   void assert(int x)
   {
       if (!x)
       {
           printf("Assertion failed!\n");
           abort();
       }
   }
    In practice, though, simply having assertions marked as such does not sufﬁce.
Just as with logging functions (see Section 8.2.1 in Chapter 8), we want to be able
to turn assertions off, and we want them to report diagnostic information—at least
more than just “assertion failed.”
   $ ./my-program
   divide.c:37: assertion ‘divisor != 0’ failed
   Abort (core dumped)
   $ _
   The techniques that realize these features in logging functions can easily be used
for assertions. The following is a typical deﬁnition of assert() for C++ programs.
   #ifndef NDEBUG
   #define assert(ex) \
   ((ex) ? 1 : (std::cerr « __FILE__ « ":" « __LINE__ \
                     « ": assertion ‘" #ex "’ failed\n", \
                     abort(), 0))
   #else
   #define assert(x) ((void) 0)
   #endif
This deﬁnition uses the __FILE__ and __LINE__ macros to report the location
of the assertion in the source ﬁle. It also uses the “stringize” mechanism of the
C preprocessor to output the assertion that actually failed (#ex). Finally, by setting
the NDEBUG preprocessor variable the assertion can be turned off (it compiles to a
no-op).
226   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



          Other languages come with assertions built into the language. In JAVA,assertions
      are speciﬁed using the assert keyword. They work just like the C++ macro, but
      throw an exception rather than aborting the program. Note that in the JAVA inter-
      preter java assertions are turned off by default. They must be enabled explicitly
      using the -enableassertions option.
          How does one use assertions during debugging? The basic idea of assertions is
      to have the computer do the observation. Thus, assertions can be spread across
      the code just like logging functions. The principles of observation, as discussed in
      Section 8.1 in Chapter 8, still apply. Assertions should not interfere with the actual
      run (and thus have no side effects), and should be used systematically rather than
      sprinkled randomly across the code. This brings us to two major (systematic) uses
      of assertions in debugging:
         ■    Data invariants that ensure data integrity.
         ■    Pre- and postconditions that ensure function correctness.




      10.3 ASSERTING INVARIANTS
      The most important use of assertions in debugging is to ensure data invariants—
      properties that must hold throughout the entire execution. As an example,consider
      a C++ class Time that manages times of the day—say,a time such as“5pm,40 minutes,
      and 20 seconds” or brief, 17:40:20. We do not care about how time is actually
      represented internally (that is the secret of the class), but we know that it provides
      an interface that allows us to access the individual components of the current time.
          class Time {
          public:
              int hour();          // 0..23
              int minutes();       // 0..59
              int seconds();       // 0..60 (including leap seconds)

                void set_hour(int h);
                ...
          }

         In the case of Time, a sane state is a valid time from 00:00:00 to 23:59:60. From
      the client view, this is an invariant that holds for all Time objects for all times. In
      practice, this means that the invariant should hold at the beginning and end of each
      public method. For this purpose, we can easily write an assertion at the end of the
      set_hour() method. This ensures that whatever set_hour() does the invariant is
      not violated.
         void Time::set_hour(int h)
         {
             // precondition
             assert(0 <= hour() && hour() <= 23) &&
                                                       10.3 Asserting Invariants       227



                (0 <= minutes() && minutes() <= 59) &&
                (0 <= seconds() && seconds() <= 60);
        ...

        // postcondition
        assert(0 <= hour() && hour() <= 23) &&
              (0 <= minutes() && minutes() <= 59) &&
              (0 <= seconds() && seconds() <= 60);
   }
(Note that we use the public interface of Time, rather than accessing the internals.
This way, we can check three more functions.)
   With these assertions, we can ensure that no set_hour() invocation will ever
make a Time object inconsistent. The violated assertion would immediately ﬂag the
infection. However, putting such a three-line assertion at the beginning and end of
each Time method induces redundancy and makes the code difﬁcult to read.A more
elegant way is to introduce a speciﬁc helper function, which checks the sanity of a
Time object.
   bool Time::sane()
   {
       return (0 <= hour() && hour() <= 23) &&
              (0 <= minutes() && minutes() <= 59) &&
              (0 <= seconds() && seconds() <= 60);
   }
sane() is more than just a helper function. sane(), being true, is an invariant of
the Time object. It should always hold before and after each public function. We can
now ensure that this invariant holds for the current Time object whenever some
method is called—for instance, at the beginning and end of set_hour()—and thus
ensure that the method did not infect the object state.
   void Time::set_hour(int h)
   {
       assert(sane()); // precondition

        // Actual code goes here

        assert(sane()); // postcondition
   }

   If one of these assertions now fails, we can immediately narrow down our
hypothesis on the location of the defect.
   ■ If the precondition is violated, the infection must have taken place before
     set_hour().
   ■ If the postcondition is violated, the infection must have taken place within
     set_hour().
   ■ If the postcondition holds, the infection cannot have taken place in
     set_hour().
228   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



         To have the entire class continuously checked for sanity, all one needs to do is to
      wrap each public method that changes the state into two assertions—both checking
      the sanity as described previously.This ensures that any infection that takes place in
      these methods is properly caught—and if all assertions pass, we can rule out Time
      as an infection site.
          If data structures get more complex,the invariants become more complex,too—
      but also ensure more properties. Example 10.1 shows an excerpt of a class invariant
      of a JAVA red/black tree—the base of the JAVA TreeMap class. Every property of the
      tree is checked in an individual helper function. The sane() method calls them all
      together. If anything ever goes wrong in a red/black tree, this sane() invariant will
      catch it.

      EXAMPLE 10.1: Ensuring the invariant of a red/black tree
      boolean sane() {
          assert (rootHasNoParent());
          assert (rootIsBlack());
          assert (redNodesHaveOnlyBlackChildren());
          assert (equalNumberOfBlackNodesOnSubtrees());
          assert (treeIsAcyclic());
          assert (parentsAreConsistent());

           return true;
      }

      boolean redNodesHaveOnlyBlackChildren() {
           workList = new LinkedList();
           workList.add(rootNode());
           while (!workList.isEmpty()) {
               Node current = (Node)workList.removeFirst();
               Node cl = current.left;
               Node cr = current.right;
               if (current.color == RED) {
                   assert (cl == null || cl.color == BLACK);
                   assert (cr == null || cr.color == BLACK);
               }
               if (cl != null) workList.add(cl);
               if (cr != null) workList.add(cr);
         }

          return true;
      }

      boolean rootHasNoParent() { ... }

         Ideally,we would set up our class with assert(sane()) statements at the begin-
      ning and end of each public method. Unfortunately, this clutters the code some-
      what. To reduce clutter, we can use an aspect (see Section 8.2.3 in Chapter 8). For
                                                      10.4 Asserting Correctness          229



the red/black tree in Example 10.1, one single aspect can ensure that the invariant
holds before and after each modifying method (add... or del...).
   public aspect RedBlackTreeSanity {
       pointcut modify():
           call(void RedBlackTree.add*(..)) ||
           call(void RedBlackTree.del*(..));

        before(): modify() {
            assert(sane());
        }

        after(): modify() {
            assert(sane());
        }
   }

    By applying or not applying the aspect, one can easily turn the assertions on and
off—for all red/black tree methods now and in the future.
    Once one has a function that checks data invariants, one can also invoke it in
an interactive debugger to check data sanity on-the-ﬂy. A conditional breakpoint in
GDB such as
   (gdb) break ’Time::set_hour(int)’ if !sane()
   Breakpoint 3 at 0x2dcf: file Time.C, line 45.
   (gdb) _

acts like an assertion. It will interrupt execution as soon as the breakpoint condition
holds at the speciﬁed location—that is, the Time invariant is violated. This even
works if the assertions have been disabled.



10.4 ASSERTING CORRECTNESS
In addition to data invariants, the major use of assertions in debugging is to ensure
that some function does the right thing. In the set_hour() example, for instance,
we can assert that set_hour() does not result in an invalid Time state. How-
ever, how do we know that set_hour(h) is correct—that is, that it sets the hour
to h?
    Such properties are expressed as postconditions—conditions over the state that
must hold at the end of the function. As an example, consider a divide function for
computing a quotient and a remainder from a dividend and a divisor. For such a
function, the precondition is divisor  ⫽ 0, whereas the postcondition is quotient ⫻
divisor ⫹ remainder ⫽ dividend. Again, a postcondition can be translated into an
assertion
   assert(quotient * divisor + remainder == dividend);
230   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



      at the end of the divide function code to check whether the computed quotient
      and divisor values are actually correct. In our set_hour() example, this reads:
         void Time::set_hour(int h)
         {
            // Actual code goes here

             assert(hour() == h);        // postcondition
         }
         Whereas a postcondition applies to the state that holds at the end of a function,
      a precondition expresses conditions over the state that must hold at the beginning
      of a function. For instance, to make our divide function work properly the divisor
      must not be zero. This condition is again expressed as an assertion
         assert(divisor != 0);

      at the beginning of the divide function. The following is the precondition for
      set_hour().
         void Time::set_hour(int h)
         {
            assert(0 <= h && h <= 23);

             // Actual code goes here
         }
         For complex data structures, specifying a pre- or postcondition may require the
      use of helper functions that check for the individual properties. For instance, if
      a sequence is to be sorted we need a helper function that checks whether the
      postcondition is satisﬁed.
         void Sequence::sort()
         {
             // Actual code goes here

              assert(is_sorted());
         }
      Helper functions used in postconditions usually make useful public methods.
         void Container::insert(Item x)
         {
             // Actual code goes here

              assert(has(x));
         }
      And, of course, invariants (as discussed in Section 10.3) are essential pre- and
      postconditions.
         void Heap::merge(Heap another_heap)
         {
             assert(sane());
                                                         10.4 Asserting Correctness           231



         assert(another_heap.sane());

         // Actual code goes here

         assert(sane());
   }

    Sometimes, a postcondition involves an earlier state—that is, a state that
occurred at the beginning of the function. In the case of the set_hour(h) func-
tion, for instance, we might want to specify that set_hour(h) only sets the hours
(i.e., it does not change the minutes or the seconds). Asserting this requires us to
save the original values at the beginning, such that we can compare against them at
the end.
   void Time::set_hour(int h)
   {
      int old_minutes = minutes();
      int old_seconds = seconds();
      assert(sane());

       // Actual code goes here

       assert(sane());
       assert(hour() == h);
       assert(minutes() == old_minutes &&
              seconds() == old_seconds);
   }

This works ﬁne, but is somewhat cumbersome. In particular, if we turn off the
assertions we end up with two unused variables, which will result in a compiler
warning (see Section 7.5 in Chapter 7 on code smells).
    In other languages,specifying pre- and postconditions is much more elegant.The
EIFFEL language incorporates the concept of design by contract, where a contract
is a set of preconditions that must be met by the caller (the client) and a set of
postconditions that are guaranteed by the callee (the supplier). In EIFFEL,a contract
regarding set_hour() would be speciﬁed as:
   set_hour (h: INTEGER) is
           -- Set the hour from ‘h’
       require
           sane_h: 0 <= h and h <= 23
       ensure
           hour_set: hour = h
           minute_unchanged: minutes = old minutes
           second_unchanged: seconds = old seconds

   These conditions are again checked at runtime, just like assertions (although a
true EIFFEL afﬁcionado would shudder at the low-level nature of assertions). Note
that the contract is part of the interface description (in contrast to assert calls). It is
thus visible to the client and thus serves as documentation. In addition to require
232   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



      and ensure, EIFFEL provides an invariant keyword the condition of which is
      checked before and after every invocation of a public method.



      10.5 ASSERTIONS AS SPECIFICATIONS
      The EIFFEL example in Section 10.4 can already serve as a speciﬁcation of what
      the function should do. In short, the assertions become part of the interface.
      A user of the set_hour() function must satisfy its precondition. A supplier of
      the set_hour() function must satisfy the postcondition under the assumption the
      precondition holds. (The invariants, if any, must also hold.) This idea of assertions,
      written using program code, that serve as speciﬁcations is something quite recent.
      In the past, program speciﬁcations were of two forms:
      1. Natural language. The great majority of all speciﬁcations are written in natural
         language: “set_hour(h) sets the current hour to h, where h is an integer in
         the range 0–23.” This style of speciﬁcation is easy to read by humans, but is
         difﬁcult to make complete and unambiguous. Furthermore, compliance with a
         natural-language speciﬁcation cannot be validated automatically.
      2. Formal systems. The most complete and unambiguous language we have is
         mathematics, and discrete mathematics is the basis for the several speciﬁcation
         languages, such as Z. Figure 10.2 shows a Z speciﬁcation for the Date class
         and its set_hour() method. It is easy to recognize the invariants as well as the
         (intermixed) pre- and postconditions. Such a speciﬁcation is obviously far more
         precise than the natural-language version.
             However, validating that the program code satisﬁes the speciﬁcation is difﬁ-
         cult. It requires us to prove that the concrete code requires no more than the
         abstract speciﬁcation and that it provides no less than the speciﬁcation. Such
         formal proofs can be tedious, and must be redone after each change to the code.
         (On the other hand, once your code is proven correct there would be no reason
         to change it again—unless the requirements change.)


                                                            set—hour
                                                            D Date
                        Date                                h? :
                        hours, minutes, seconds :           0 # h? # 23
                        0 # hours # 23                      hours’ 5 h?
                        0 # minutes # 59                    minutes’5 minutes
                        0 # seconds # 59                    seconds’5 seconds

      FIGURE 10.2
      A Z speciﬁcation for Date and set_hour(). The speciﬁcation states the invariants that hold
      for Date as well as the pre- and postconditions for set_hour().
                                            10.6 From Assertions to Veriﬁcation           233



    However, both approaches have in common that speciﬁcation and code are
separated—leading to huge efforts when it comes to mapping one onto the other.
In contrast, EIFFEL-style speciﬁcations (and, more generally, all assertions) integrate
the speciﬁcation within the code. Thus,they allow us to validate correctness simply
by running the program. For every program run where the assertions hold, the
assertions guarantee the correctness of the result. For the large bulk of mainstream
software, this is already largely sufﬁcient. (There are some programs, though, where
a failing assertion is not an option. A computer controlling an airbag, for instance,
simply must produce a result in a speciﬁc time frame. For such dependable systems,
we must still prove program correctness for all runs.)




10.6 FROM ASSERTIONS TO VERIFICATION
The success of speciﬁcation languages largely depends on their expressive power
as well as the quantity and quality of available tools. A language that excels in both
areas is JML, the Java Modeling Language. JML assertions are written as special
comments in the JAVA code, recognized by JML tools alone and ignored by ordinary
JAVA compilers. Using requires and ensures keywords, one can specify the pre-
and postconditions of an individual JAVA method in EIFFEL style.
   /*@ requires 0 <= h && h <= 23
     @ ensures hours() == h &&
     @          minutes() == \old(minutes()) &&
     @          seconds() == \old(seconds())
     @*/
   void Time::set_hour(int h) ...
    As in this example, assertions are written as ordinary Boolean JAVA expressions
together with some extra operators such as \old, which stands for the value of the
variable at the moment the method was entered. Using JMLC,the JML compiler,such
a speciﬁcation can be translated into assertions that are then checked at runtime.
    JML assertions are more than syntactic sugar around ordinary assertions,though.
For one thing, they can serve as speciﬁcations. What does the following fragment
of JML specify?
   /*@ requires x >= 0.0;
     @ ensures JMLDouble
     @         .approximatelyEqualTo
     @         (x, \result * \result, eps);
     @*/
   Example 10.2 shows a more complex JML example—a speciﬁcation for a debit
card. Note the use of invariants (invariant) to assert data sanity (as in EIFFEL, the
invariant is checked before and after every invocation of a public method), the use
of quantiﬁers (\forall) to express conditions that span multiple variables, and
the speciﬁcation of exceptional behavior (signals).
234   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations




      EXAMPLE 10.2: A debit card speciﬁed in JML
      public class Purse {
        final int MAX_BALANCE;
        int balance;
        //@ invariant 0 <= balance && balance <= MAX_BALANCE;

          byte[] pin;
          /*@ invariant pin != null && pin.length == 4 &&
            @           (\forall int i; 0 <= i && i < 4;
            @                        0 <= byte[i] && byte[i] <= 9)
            @*/

          /*@ requires   amount >= 0;
            @ assignable balance;
            @ ensures    balance == \old(balance) - amount &&
            @            \result == balance;
            @ signals    (PurseException) balance == \old(balance);
            @*/

          int debit(int amount) throws PurseException {
          ...
          }

      Source: Burdy et al. (2003).


         Again, JMLC translates all of these conditions into runtime assertions and thus
      ensures that no violation passes by unnoticed. However, there is even more to gain
      from JML, such as the following.
      ■   Documentation. The JMLDOC documentation generator produces HTML con-
          taining both JAVADOC comments and JML speciﬁcations. This is a great help for
          browsing and publishing JML speciﬁcations.
      ■   Unit testing. JMLUNIT combines the JML compiler JMLC with JUNIT (see
          Chapter 3) such that one can test units against JML speciﬁcations.
      ■   Invariant generation. The DAIKON invariant-detection tool (see Chapter 11)
          can report detected invariants in JML format, thus allowing simple integration
          with JML.
      ■   Static checking. The ESC/JAVA static checker checks simple JML speciﬁcations
          statically, using the deduction techniques laid out in Chapter 7. In particular, it
          can leverage speciﬁed invariants to detect potential null pointer exceptions or
          out-of-bound array indexes.
      ■   Veriﬁcation. JML speciﬁcations can be translated into proof obligations for vari-
          ous theorem provers.The more that properties are explicitly speciﬁed the easier
          it is to prove them.
         Finally, the extended use of assertions also improves the software process, as
      assertions establish a contract between developers—or, more generally, between
                                                                 10.7 Reference Runs         235




  BUG STORY 10
  The Lufthansa A320 Accident in Warsaw
  On September 14, 1993, a Lufthansa A320 landed at Warsaw airport in a thunderstorm.
  The landing appeared to be normal and smooth, albeit somewhat fast. The pilots were
  unable to activate any of the braking mechanisms (spoilers,reverse thrust,wheel brakes)
  for 9 seconds after touchdown,at which point the spoilers and reverse thrust deployed.
  The wheel brakes ﬁnally became effective 13 seconds after touchdown.The aircraft was
  by this time way too far along the runway to stop before the runway end. It ran off
  the end, and over an earth bank near the end of the runway, before stopping. The ﬁrst
  ofﬁcer died in the accident, as did a passenger who was overcome by smoke from the
  burning aircraft.
    The investigation of the accident found that the aircraft logics prohibited actuation
  of reverse thrust unless the shock absorbers were compressed at both main landing
  gears. At Warsaw, due to windshear, the shock absorbers of one landing gear were not
  compressed sufﬁciently. The aircraft software would not allow actuation of reverse
  thrust, in compliance with its speciﬁcation.
     As a consequence, Lufthansa had concluded there was a problem with the speci-
  ﬁcation, and was talking with Airbus on a change in the braking logic to reduce the
  weight-on-wheels load criterion from 12 metric tons to 2 metric tons. In the mean-
  time, Lufthansa required their pilots to land relatively hard in such weather and runway
  conditions, thus compressing the shock absorbers and “fooling” the speciﬁcation.


clients and suppliers of software. As the contract is unambiguous and complete,
it allows for blame assignment. Rather than discussing who is wrong, one can
immediately focus on making the program conform to its speciﬁcation. Overall,
few techniques are as helpful for debugging as assertions, and no other technique
has as many additional beneﬁts. For every program, there is every reason to use
assertions lavishly.
    By deﬁnition, speciﬁcations guarantee correctness. However, they do not pro-
tect against surprises—simply because the speciﬁcation does not match what is
actually desired. The accident of a Lufthansa A320 (see Bug Story 10) in Warsaw
is a tragic example of a situation in which everything performed according to
the speciﬁcation—a speciﬁcation that was in error and had to be altered after
the accident. Therefore, be sure to have all of your assertions (and speciﬁcations)
carefully reviewed. Do not fall into the trap of adapting your code to a faulty
speciﬁcation.



10.7 REFERENCE RUNS
In some cases, the correct behavior of a program P1 is not speciﬁed explicitly but
by reference to another program P0 , the behavior of which is deﬁned as “correct.”
236   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



      LIST 10.1: Sources of Reference Runs
      The program has been modiﬁed. After a change to the program, we want to preserve the
         original behavior. The old version of the program thus becomes the reference version P0 ,
         and the central behavior of the new version P1 must not differ from the central behavior
         of P0 .
            As an example, consider a program P0 where a security leak has been detected. Before
         you release a patched version P1 , you would like to ensure that P1 behaves like P0 in every
         aspect—except for the security leak, of course.
      The environment has changed. After a larger change to the environment, we want to ensure
         that the old behavior is also present in the new environment. Therefore, P0 becomes the
         program in the old environment, and P1 is the program in the new environment.
            The most famous example of this situation is the year 2000 problem, where several
         programs had to deal with the coming of the new century. If a system in the simulated
         year 2000 to the current year 1999 showed any differences (except for the date, that is),
         the system would have a defect.
      The program has been ported. After moving a program from one machine to another, we
         want to ensure that the program P1 on the new machine behaves like P0 on the old
         machine. System architectures and environments have many differences that can impact
         the program’s behavior. In addition to all of the possible inﬂuences listed in Chapter 4,
         changes in data representation, memory organization, or simply different versions of the
         used libraries and tools can all induce differing, and sometimes incorrect, behavior.
      The program has been cloned. The program P1 may be a complete reimplementation of P0 —
         for instance, because the source code of P0 is not (or no longer) available, or because one
         needs a component P1 that acts like P0 for the purpose of interoperability.
            Suppose I wanted to write a PERL compiler—that is, a tool that translates PERL pro-
         grams into machine code. To ensure correctness of my compiler, I have to compare the
         behavior of the compiled programs with their behavior when being executed by the original
         PERL interpreter. (Actually, this is how PERL ’s semantics are deﬁned: by referring to the
         implementation of the PERL interpreter.)


      This means that P1 is supposed to behave like P0 in some central aspect, or even in
      every aspect. List 10.1 outlines a number of situations in which this happens. The
      most common is that P1 is a new revision or variant of the original P0 .
          Reference programs are mainly used as oracles—that is, as universal devices
      that tell us what is correct, right, or true. For instance, consider testing. Any testing
      method needs to assess whether the result produced by a program is correct or
      not. Using a reference program P0 , one can simply compare against the result of
      the reference program. This is a common scenario for regression testing. We feed
      P0 and P1 with the same input. Any unexpected difference in output is a potential
      error—or at least an anomaly to keep in mind for further investigation.
          During debugging, we frequently need to tell whether some program state is
      infected or not. Having a reference program P0 as an oracle, we can compare its
                                                               10.7 Reference Runs       237




FIGURE 10.3
The GUARD relative debugger. The assertion window highlights differences between the
states of two program runs.


state against the debugged program P1 —and again, any difference is a potential
infection or anomaly.
   Typically, such a comparison is done by having two interactive debuggers run in
parallel,with the programmer comparing the individual results.This is a tedious and
error-prone process. A better alternative is to automate the comparison. This con-
cept has been explored under the name of relative debugging—that is,debugging a
program relative to a reference version. The key idea of relative debugging is to exe-
cute P0 and P1 in parallel—and ﬂagging any difference between the program states.
   As an example,Figure 10.3 shows the relative debugger GUARDdebugging a JAVA
Polygon program under two JAVA virtual machines:the reference P0 (using JVM 1.3)
and its variant P1 ,using JVM 1.5. Both processes can be stepped through individually.
However, speciﬁc variables (such as perimeter) can be set up to be compared.
    How does GUARD know when and where to compare variable values? This is
speciﬁed by the programmer. Essentially, the programmer sets up a relative asser-
tion—an assertion that two variables have the same value at a speciﬁc location. For
instance, the GUARD assertion
assert p1::perimeter@Polygon.java:65 == p0::perimeter@Polygon.java:65
238   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



      ensures that in process p1 the value of the variable perimeter at the location
      Polygon.java:65 is equal to the value of the same variable at the same location
      in process p0. GUARD evaluates every relative assertion as execution reaches the
      locations, and ﬂags an error if it is violated—very much like the GDB assertion in
      Section 10.3.
         The Comparison Results window shows the result of this comparison. In the
      ﬁrst step,the perimeter variable was identical in both programs. In the second step,
      though,GUARD found a difference (the relative assertion has failed). The perimeter
      values differ by 1.13. Because JVM 1.3 is the reference, the JVM 1.5 variant is wrong
      here.
          In practice, the two programs being compared may differ in more than just their
      control ﬂow. Their data structures may also be organized differently. For instance,
      one implementation may choose to store elements in a tree, whereas another
      chooses a hash table. Therefore, GUARD lets the user deﬁne individual comparison
      functions that can compare using a common abstraction, such as sets.
         All in all,relative debugging exploits the existence of a reference run in a classical
      interactive debugging session.The more of the state and the run covered by relative
      assertions the easier it will be to catch infections early. Best results are achieved
      when porting an otherwise identical program from one environment to another.




      10.8 SYSTEM ASSERTIONS
      Some properties of a program must hold during the entire execution. Good oper-
      ating systems take care that a program does not access or change the data of other
      processes,that mathematical exceptions do not go by unnoticed,and that a program
      stays within the limits set by its privileges. One could think of these properties as
      invariants that are continuously checked at runtime.
          In addition to increasing security for the user, such properties are immensely
      useful for debugging, as they limit the scope of the search. Assume I experience
      some memory error on a machine where the individual processes are not clearly
      separated. In such a case, I must extend my search to all processes that ran in
      conjunction with my program—a situation that is difﬁcult to reproduce and to
      debug.
          Even within a single process, though, it is advisable to have certain properties
      that are guaranteed during the entire run. The most important of these properties
      is the integrity of the program data. If the fundamental techniques for accessing
      memory no longer work, it becomes difﬁcult to isolate individual failure causes.
          In C and C++ programs, misuse of the heap memory is a common source of
      errors. In C and C++, the heap is a source for memory. This is the place where new
      objects are allocated. If an object is no longer required, the appropriate heap mem-
      ory must be deallocated (or freed) explicitly. The memory thus becomes available
      for other objects.
                                                          10.8 System Assertions          239



    The programmer must take care, though, that deallocated memory is no longer
used. In addition, deallocated memory must not be deallocated again. Both actions
result in time bombs—faults that manifest themselves only millions of instructions
later and are thus difﬁcult to isolate.
    Fortunately, a number of useful tools help validate the state of the heap. It is a
good idea to always have these tools ready during development, and to apply them
at the slightest suspicion. It makes little sense to reason about individual variable
values if the structure of the heap is not sound. The catch of these tools is that they
increase memory and time requirements and thus cannot be used in production
code.


10.8.1 Validating the Heap with MALLOC_CHECK_
Using the GNU C runtime library (default on Linux systems), one can avoid
common errors related to heap use simply by setting an environment variable
called MALLOC_CHECK_. For instance, one can detect multiple deallocation of heap
memory.
   $ MALLOC_CHECK_=2 ./myprogram myargs
   free() called on area that was already free’d()
   Aborted (core dumped)
   $ _
The core ﬁle generated at program abort can be read in by a debugger, such that
one is directly led to the location where free() was called the second time. This
postmortem debugging was discussed in Section 8.3.3 in Chapter 8.


10.8.2 Avoiding Buffer Overﬂows with ELECTRICFENCE
The ELECTRICFENCE library effectively prohibits buffer overﬂows. Its basic idea
is to allocate arrays in memory such that each array is preceded and followed by
a nonexisting memory area—the actual “electric fence.” If the program attempts
to access this area (i.e., an overﬂow occurred), the operating system aborts the
program.
    Using ELECTRICFENCE, one can quickly narrow down the overﬂowing array in
sample (Example 1.1). We compile sample using the efence library and call the
resulting sample-with-efence program with two arguments. As soon as a[2] is
accessed, the program is aborted.
   $ gcc -g -o sample-with-efence sample.c -lefence
   $ ./sample-with-efence 11 14
   Electric Fence 2.1
   Segmentation fault (core dumped)
   $ _
Again, the core ﬁle can be read in by a debugger—unless one runs sample-
with-efence directly within the debugger.
240   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



      10.8.3 Detecting Memory Errors with VALGRIND
      VALGRIND (named after the holy entrance to Valhalla, the home of Odin) provides
      the functionality of ELECTRICFENCE, plus a little more. VALGRIND detects:
          ■ Read access to noninitialized memory
          ■ Write or read access to nonallocated memory
          ■ Write or read access across array boundaries
          ■ Write or read access in speciﬁc stack areas
          ■ Detection of memory leaks (areas that were allocated but never deallocated)


         If we apply VALGRIND to the sample program from Example 1.1, we obtain
      a message stating that sample accesses memory in an illegal manner. This access
      takes place in shell_sort() (line 18), called by main and __libc_start_main.
          $ valgrind sample 11 14
          Invalid read of size 4
            at 0x804851F: shell_sort (sample.c:18)
            by 0x8048646: main (sample.c:35)
            by 0x40220A50: __libc_start_main (in /lib/libc---2.3.so)
            by 0x80483D0: (within /home/zeller/sample)

         The remaining message gives some details about the invalid memory area. It is
      close to the memory area allocated by main (line 32)—the memory area malloc’ed
      for a[0 ... 1].
            Address 0x40EE902C is 0 bytes after a block alloc’d
            at 0x4015D414: malloc (vg_clientfuncs.c:103)
            by 0x80485D9: main (sample.c:32)
            by 0x40220A50: __libc_start_main (in /lib/libc-2.3.so)
            by 0x80483D0: (within /home/zeller/sample)
          $ _

         How does this work? VALGRIND is built around an interpreter for x86 machine
      code instructions. It interprets the machine instructions of the program to be
      debugged, and keeps track of the used memory in so-called shadow memory.
      ■   Each memory bit is associated with a controlling value bit (V-bit). Each V-bit is
          initially unset. VALGRIND sets it as soon as the associated memory bit is being
          written.
      ■   In addition, each byte is associated with an allocated bit (A-bit), which is set
          if the corresponding byte is currently allocated. When some memory area is
          deallocated,VALGRIND clears the A-bits.
      Whenever the program tries to read some memory with A-bits or V-bits that are not
      set,VALGRIND ﬂags an error.
          Figure 10.4 shows the situation in whichVALGRIND generates the previous error
      message for the sample program: a[0] and a[1] are allocated and initialized—their
      A- andV-bits set (shown in gray). In contrast, a[2] is neither allocated nor initialized.
      Accessing it causes VALGRIND to issue an error message.
                                                                   10.8 System Assertions          241



    Address        0 ⫻ 40EE9024                 0 ⫻ 40EE9028                0 ⫻ 40EE902C
      A-bits
      V-bits
   Variables
                     a[0] ⫽ 11                    a[1] ⫽ 14                     a[2] ⫽ ?



FIGURE 10.4
A- and V-bits in VALGRIND. A-bits are set if the associated byte is allocated; V-bits are set if
the associated bit has been written.


    Using VALGRIND is not without drawbacks. The code size can increase up to
12 times, and execution times can increase up to 25 times. Memory usage doubles
due to shadow memory. A more efﬁcient way is not to interpret the machine code
but to instrument it—that is, to include extra code at memory accesses to update
and check shadow memory. This approach is realized in the PURIFY tool, which
detects the same class of errors as VALGRIND but in a more effective way. Programs
instrumented with PURIFY have a typical slowdown factor of only 5 to 10. (PURIFY
also comes with a nice GUI as well as phone support from IBM.)
    The relatively low overhead is, in general, acceptable for debugging purposes.
Most of the Linux KDE project,for instance,is checked withVALGRIND. PURIFY has a
long record of successfully checking arbitrary programs. Experienced programmers
routinely validate the heap integrity with VALGRIND, PURIFY, or similar tools—just
for easy elimination of a failure source and an extra ounce of conﬁdence.
    There is one point where VALGRIND is different from PURIFY and other mem-
ory checkers. VALGRIND acts as a general framework, where VALGRIND plug-ins
can execute arbitrary code while the original program is interpreted. This allows
for much more than just memory check. In fact, memory checking is just one of
VALGRIND’s plug-ins. For instance, it is easy to write a VALGRIND plug-in that logs
the current execution position,in a fashion similar to PIN (see Section 8.2.4 in Chap-
ter 8). The DAIKON tool, discussed in Section 11.5 in Chapter 11, uses a specialized
VALGRIND plug-in to capture execution traces of Linux binaries.


10.8.4 Language Extensions
At this point, one may wonder why we might bother with system assertions at all.
Shouldn’t one simply switch to a programming language in which such problems do
not occur? Indeed, languages with managed memory and garbage collection, such
as JAVA or C#, do not suffer from the memory problems described in this section.
A more conservative migration path from low-level languages is to use a safer dialect
of an existing programming language. Such a dialect brings extensions that allow
programmers to specify further properties of language entities. These extensions
can then be checked (at runtime, but also statically) to catch errors early.
242   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



          As an example, consider CYCLONE, a safer dialect of the C programming lan-
      guage. CYCLONE’s central extension to C is the concept of special pointers—that
      is, C pointers with special properties. For instance, in CYCLONE one can declare
      a pointer that can never be NULL by using @ instead of *. The getc() function,
      retrieving a character from a ﬁle, is thus declared as
         int getc (FILE @);

          Calling getc() with a potentially NULL pointer results in a runtime check being
      triggered: If getc() is called with a NULL pointer, the runtime check will terminate
      the program rather than having getc() fail in an uncontrolled fashion. In addition,the
      CYCLONE compiler will give a warning about having inserted such a runtime check.
           extern FILE *f;
           char c = getc (f); // warning: NULL check inserted

         Another interesting CYCLONE feature is fat pointers—pointers that not only
      record a location but bound information (such as the size of the area being pointed
      to). Such a pointer is declared by using ? instead of *. Using fat pointers, a function
      such as strlen(), determining the length of a string, can be declared as
         int strlen (const char? s);

          In contrast to the original strlen() function, the CYCLONE implementation
      need not scan the string for a terminating NUL character. Instead, it can access the
      bounds of the string s using s.size. This also implies that, unlike the original C
      variant, the CYCLONE version will not scan past the end of strings that lack a NUL
      terminator. All memory accesses via a fat pointer will have bounds automatically
      checked at runtime. If a violation can be detected at compile time already, the
      CYCLONE compiler will ﬂag an error.
          To detect errors at compile time, CYCLONE imposes a number of restrictions on
      C programs (List 10.2)—restrictions that effectively deal with the caveats outlined in
      List 7.3 and that still enable CYCLONE to support low-level programming.All in all,a
      few extensions sufﬁce to make C-style programming almost as safe as programming
      in JAVA, or other high-level languages, and to prevent memory misuse as described
      in this section.



      10.9 CHECKING PRODUCTION CODE
      We have now seen that the computer can automate much of the observation for us,
      and that large parts of the program state can be checked during execution. This is
      helpful in debugging and increases our conﬁdence in the program. When it comes
      to releasing the program, though, should we still have all checks enabled? First, the
      following are some checks that should never be turned off.

      Critical results. If your program computes a result that people’s lives, health, or
         money depends on, it is a good idea to validate the result using some additional
                                                   10.9 Checking Production Code           243



LIST 10.2: Restrictions Imposed by CYCLONE to Preserve Safety
■   NULL checks are inserted to prevent segmentation faults.
■   Pointer arithmetic is restricted.
■   Pointers must be initialized before use.
■   Dangling pointers are prevented through region analysis and limitations on free().
■   Only “safe” casts and unions are allowed.
■   goto into scopes is disallowed.
■   switch labels in different scopes are disallowed.
■   Pointer-returning functions must execute return.
■   setjmp() and longjmp() are not supported.
Source: Jim et al. (2002).


   computation.As a lesser alternative,one may also use n-version programming—
   that is,one computes the result a second time (using an alternate implementation
   or algorithm) and compares the results automatically.
       Obviously, an assertion is not the best way of checking critical results, in that
   an assertion can be turned off—and you do not want to turn off warnings on
   critical results.
External conditions. Any conditions that are not within our control must be
   checked for integrity. This especially holds for external input, which must be
   veriﬁed to satisfy all syntactic and semantic constraints. In case of error, the user
   must be notiﬁed.
       Again, an assertion is not the right way to check external conditions. Think
   of an assertion that checks whether the length of the input stays within the
   buffer length, for instance. Turning off such an assertion results in a security
   leak. Furthermore, the input to a program is typically under the control of the
   user, and when the user makes a mistake it is better to tell him or her “A PIN has
   exactly four digits” rather than to have the program abort with a message such
   as assertion ‘length == 4’ failed.
    What do we do with the other assertions in production code, though? The
following are some arguments to consider:
The more active assertions there are, the greater the chances of catching infec-
   tions. Because not every infection need result in a failure, assertions increase
   your chances of detecting defects that would otherwise go by unnoticed.
  Therefore, assertions should remain turned on.
The sooner a program fails the easier it is to track the defect. The larger the dis-
   tance between defect and failure, the more difﬁcult it is to track the infection
   chain. The more active assertions there are, the sooner an infection will be
   caught, which signiﬁcantly eases debugging. This idea of making code “fail fast”
   is an argument for leaving assertions turned on.
 244     CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



         Defects that escape into the ﬁeld are the most difﬁcult to track. Remember that
            failures that occur at the user’s site are often difﬁcult to reproduce (see
            Chapter 4). Failing assertions can give the essential clues on how the infection
            spread.
         By default, failing assertions are not user friendly. The message from a failing
            assertion may be helpful for programmers but will appear cryptic to most users—
            and the fact that the program simply aborts (which is the default) is not what
            you would call a helpful behavior.
                However,this is not yet a reason to turn off assertions.An unnoticed incorrect
            behavior is far more dangerous than a noticed aborted behavior.When something
            bad may happen, do not shoot the messenger (and turn assertions off), but make
            sure the program gracefully fails.For instance, a global exception handler could
            state that a fatal error occurred and offer some means of recovery.
         Assertions impact performance. This argument is true, but should be considered
            with respect to the beneﬁts of assertions. As with every performance issue, one
            must ﬁrst detect how much performance is actually lost. Only if this amount is
            intolerable one should speciﬁcally check for where the performance is lost.
                An assertion executed several times as an invariant, for instance, may impact
            performance far more than a single postcondition executed once at the end of
            a complex function. Regarding performance, it is thus a wise strategy to turn
            off those assertions that do have an impact on performance (as proven by ear-
            lier measurements) and to leave on those assertions that prohibit a widespread
            infection—for instance, those assertions that control the integrity of a result
            (unless already checked as a critical result).

             Note that the current trend in software development is to trade performance for
         runtime safety wherever possible. JAVA and .NET have introduced the concept of
         managed code and managed data, whereby the integrity of both code and data is
         constantly monitored and veriﬁed. Given the security issues in our networked world,
         and given the continuing explosion of computing power, the cost of checking as
         much as possible becomes more and more irrelevant when compared to the risk of
         not checking enough. Eventually, proving correctness may turn out to be a strategy
         for optimization. If it can be proven that an assertion always holds, it can easily be
         eliminated.



         10.10 CONCEPTS
How To To automate observation, use assertions.
       Assertions catch infections before they can propagate through the program state
          and cover their origins.
         Like observation statements, assertions must not interfere with the actual compu-
            tation.
                                                                     10.11 Tools       245



To use assertions, check preconditions, data invariants, and postconditions:
    ■ Preconditions document the requirements for calling a function. A successful

       check means the requirements are met.
    ■ Data invariants specify properties over data that hold before and after

       each public function that operates on that data. A successful check means
       sane data.
    ■ Postconditions describe the effects of a function. A successful check means

       correctness of the result.
Assertions can serve as speciﬁcations (as in EIFFEL or JML) and thus document
    interfaces.
In contrast to “external”speciﬁcation languages, assertions are interwoven with the
    code and can be easily checked at runtime.
Rich speciﬁcation languages such as JML provide a smooth transition from assertions
    (checked at runtime) to static checking and veriﬁcation (checked at compile
    time).
To check a program against a reference program, use relative debugging.
To check memory integrity, use specialized tools to detect errors in mem-
   ory management. Such tools should be applied before all other methods of
   debugging.
The most sophisticated tools detect memory misuse by tracking memory usage via
   shadow memory.
To prevent memory errors in a low-level language, consider using a safer dialect
   such as CYCLONE for the C language.
   Use assertions to make your code fail as fast as possible. This increases the
chances of catching infections. It also shortens the chain from defect to failure.
   Assertions cause a performance loss. You gain beneﬁts for debugging, though,
and avoid risks of erroneous computing—advantages that frequently outweigh the
costs. Therefore, leave lightweight assertions on in production code—offering a
user-friendly recovery from failed assertions.
   Do not use assertions for critical results or external conditions. Use hard-coded
error handling instead.




10.11 TOOLS
JML . The Iowa State University JML tools include the JML compiler ( JMLC), the
  JMLUNIT unit testing program, and the JMLDOC documentation generator. All
  are publicly available at http://www.jmlspecs.org/ .
ESC/JAVA . The ESC/JAVA tool combines static checking with JML.The version that
  fully supports JML is ESC/JAVA version 2,developed by David Cok and Joe Kiniry.
246   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



         ESC/JAVA version 2 is available at http://kind.ucd.ie/products/opensource/
         ESCJava2/ .
      GUARD. The GUARD relative debugger was presented by Sosic̆ and Abramson
         (1997), who also pioneered the concept of relative debugging. Their web
         site contains more on the concept as well as the debugger. This is found at
         http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/∼davida/guard/ .
      VALGRIND . The VALGRIND tool for Linux is part of Linux distributions for x86
         processors. It is available at http://www.valgrind.org/ .
      PURIFY . PURIFY, marketed by IBM, is also available for Linux/Unix and Windows.
         Information on PURIFY is available at http://www.ibm.com/software/awdtools/
         purify/ .
      INSURE++ . INSURE++ is a commercial tool that detects memory problems by
         instrumenting C and C++ source code. It is therefore available on a number
         of platforms. It may be found at http://www.parasoft.com/ .
      CYCLONE . The CYCLONE dialect was developed by Jim et al. (2002). An
         open-source compiler for Linux can be downloaded at http://www.research.att.
         com/projects/cyclone/ .
      CCURED. The CCURED language by Necula et al. (2002) takes an approach similar
         to that of CYCLONE, but moves control from the programmer to the system.
         For this purpose, it has to extend data representations by metadata to enable
         even better dynamic book-keeping. Such metadata would, for instance, record
         how pointers are supposed to be used. Condit et al. (2003) describe the use of
         CCURED on real-world software such as network demons. CCURED, as well as
         an online demo, are available at http://manju.cs.berkeley.edu/ccured/ .



      10.12 FURTHER READING
      Assertions are as old as computers. It is reported that even John von Neumann used
      them. To see interesting discussions on the use of assertions, have a look at the
      “People, Projects, and Patterns” WIKI at http://c2.com/cgi/wiki. You can contri-
      bute, too! The following are some starting points:
         ■ http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?WhatAreAssertions
         ■ http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?UseAssertions
         ■ http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?DoNotUseAssertions


         Although people generally believe that assertions are a good thing, there is only
      one study that has actually conducted controlled experiments to validate this claim.
      Müller et al. (2002) found that assertions indeed do increase liability and understand-
      ability of programs, although requiring a larger programming effort. (Müller et al.
      did not research the use of assertions for debugging, though.)
         The EIFFEL language realized the idea of design by contract pioneered by
      Meyer (1997). EIFFEL software and voluminous training material are available at
      http://www.eiffel.com/ .
                                                         10.12 Further Reading         247



    To learn more about the Z speciﬁcation language,I recommend TheWay of Z by
Jacky (1996). Few other books on formal methods come close in clarity, precision,
and completeness.
    JML was originally developed by Leavens et al. (1999). Since then, it has turned
into a cooperative effort of dozens of researchers. Burdy et al. (2003) give an
overview of JML tools and applications. Leavens and Cheon (2004) give a tutorial
on how to use JML as a design-by-contract tool. These papers are available on the
JML home page at http://www.jmlspecs.org/ .
    Once one has speciﬁed an invariant of a data structure, one can detect any
violation. Demsky and Rinard (2003) go one step further and suggest automatic
repair of data structures with given invariants.
    The SPEC# language (spoken“spec sharp”) by Barnett et al. (2004) is an extension
of C#, providing non-NULL types (as in CYCLONE) as well as method contracts (as
in JML). It is being used at Microsoft to improve safety. See the project home page
at http://research.microsoft.com/SpecSharp/ .
    ESC/Java was developed at the Compaq Systems Research Center by a
large group of researchers. To get started with extended static checking in
general, see the project home page at http://kind.ucd.ie/products/opensource/
ESCJava2/ .
    The VALGRIND tool was initially developed by Julian Seward, and later extended
to a framework by Nicholas Nethercote.The paper of Nethercote and Seward (2003)
gives several details about the framework.
    The concept of having software fail fast is discussed by Shore (2004),
using several code examples to illustrate the use of assertions and exception
handlers.
    Checking the integrity of all input is an important factor in building secure
software. See Viega and McGraw (2001) for an introduction to the subject.
    N -version programming is a lesser alternative to checking results,because there
are serious doubts whether it works. For details,see Knight and Leveson (1986) and
Leveson et al. (1990).
    Bug Story 10, on the A320 accident, was compiled from “Report of the Main
Commission Aircraft Accident Investigation Warsaw,” and information from Peter
Ladkin, posted to the Risks Digest (vol. 15, issue 30) in December 1993. The
report is available, along with other accident reports, at http://sunnyday.mit.edu/
accidents/ .




EXERCISES
10.1 Why can an assertion such as assert(sane()) be used at the beginning and
     end of public functions but not necessarily at other places?
10.2 What happens if sane() is called from hour()? How can you improve the
     sane() function?
248   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



      10.3 Write assertions for the bigbang program shown in Figure 8.2:
           (a) As invariants for the Element and Container classes.
           (b) As pre- and postconditions for each public method, checking (among
               others) that the invariants still hold.
           Do you catch the infection using these assertions? If so,how? If not,why not?
      10.4   Consider the public interface of the JAVA TreeMap class. Design an aspect
             that adds assert(sane()) to the beginning and end of each public func-
             tion. Optimize the aspect such that postmethod checks are only issued for
             methods that can change the state.
      10.5 Assume we had a function that could tell us whether the state is sane [say,
           state_is_sane()]. To search a defect, all we would have to do is insert
           assertions
                  assert(state_is_sane());

             into the program to narrow down the infection site by a simple binary search,
             which could even be automated. However, if we had such a function we
             would not have to search the defect anyway. Why?
      10.6 Assume the program state consists only of objects the sanity of which is
           guaranteed by (invariant) assertions. Can we assume that the entire state is
           sane?
      10.7   Rather than writing an assertion such as
                  assert(0 <= h && h <= 23);

             I can use GDB to check the following condition.
                  (gdb) break ’Time::set_hour(int)’ if h < 0 || h > 23
                  Breakpoint 3 at 0x2dcf: file Time.C, line 45.
                  (gdb) _

             Discuss the pros and cons of this technique.
      10.8   Consider the BinaryTree class shown in Example 10.3. Write some aspects
             for the following tasks.
             (a) A logging aspect that logs every entry and every exit of a method from
                 the BinaryTree class. This aspect shall log which method is entered or
                 left.
             (b) A logging aspect that displays every setting of the left or the right child
                 of a BinaryTree.
      10.9 For the BinaryTree class shown in Example 10.3,write some JML invariants
           that hold for a tree node per the following:
             ■   The key is a nonnegative number.
                                                 10.12 Further Reading   249




EXAMPLE 10.3: The BinaryTree.java program
 1   class BinaryTree {
 2       private int key;
 3       private Object value;
 4       private BinaryTree right;
 5       private BinaryTree left;
 6
 7       public BinaryTree(int _key,Object _value) {
 8           key   = _key;
 9           value = _value;
10           right = left = null;
11       }
12
13       // Lookup a node with a specific key
14       public Object lookup(int _key) {
15           BinaryTree descend;
16           if (_key == key)
17                return value;
18           if (_key < key)
19                descend = left;
20           else
21                descend = right;
22           if (descend == null)
23                return null;
24           return descend.lookup(_key);
25       }
26
27       // Insert a node with a certain key and value
28       public void insert(int _key, Object _value) {
29           if (_key <= key)
30                if (left == null)
31                     left = new BinaryTree(_key,_value);
32                else
33                     left.insert(_key,_value);
34           else
35                if (right == null)
36                     right = new BinaryTree(_key,_value);
37                else
38                     right.insert(_key,_value);
39       }
40
41       // Delete a node with a certain key
42       public boolean delete (int key) {
43           // ...
44           return true;
45       }
46   }
250   CHAPTER 10 Asserting Expectations



             ■ The keys of all left children are less than or equal to the node’s key. The
               keys of all right children are greater than or equal to the node’s key.
             ■ The data object is not empty.


      10.10 Sketch JML assertions for the insert method of BinaryTree (Exam-
            ple 10.3) that guarantee the following conditions:
            ■ The inserted object is not null.
            ■ The key and the object are not altered during insertion.
            ■ The children of this node contain one further instance of the inserted

              key/object pair after insertion.
      10.11 Consider the following three pieces of code, which sum up the elements in
            an array a[]. First, a PYTHON version:
                 a = read_elems()
                 sum = 0
                 for elem in a.elems():
                    sum = sum + elem
             A C version:
                 read_elems(a);
                 sum = 0;
                 for (int i = 0; i < n; i++)
                     sum += a[i];
             And ﬁnally, a JAVA version:
                 a = read_elems();
                 sum = 0;
                 for (Iterator it = a.iterator(); it.hasNext(); )
                     sum += it.next();
             In all three versions,we have a variable sum that at the end of the loop holds
             the sum of all elements in a[]. Using relative debugging, which assertions
             can you set up?
      10.12 What are the respective beneﬁts of relative assertions versus standard
            assertions?
      10.13 Some possible points for a program examination are as follows.
            ■ Function foo() is reached.
            ■ Variable z[0] is equal to 2.
            ■ Function foo() is reached and variable z[0] is equal to 2.
            ■ Function foo() is reached or variable z[0] is equal to 2.
            ■ Function foo() is reached and at least one of z[0], z[1], …, z[99] is

              equal to 2.
            ■ All of z[0], z[1], …, z[99] are equal to 2.

             Assume that the processor has no special debugging support, except for
             changing individual machine instructions into interrupt instructions.
                                                       10.12 Further Reading         251



       (a) Sort these queries according to the execution speed of the examined
           program from fastest to slowest.
       (b) Sketch processor support that can make these queries more efﬁcient.
       (c) Sketch possible code instrumentation (e.g., adding new code at compi-
           lation time) to make these queries more efﬁcient.
10.14 Use VALGRIND (or similar heap checker) to check bigbang (Example 8.3)
      for memory problems.
10.15 We observe a union in a C program—a data structure in which all members
      start at the same address and in which only one member is actually used.
           union node_value {
             char c;   // 1 byte
             int i;    // 4 bytes
             double d; // 8 bytes
           }
       Your goal is to disambiguate the union—that is, to decide which of the
       members c, i, or d is actually being used. Discuss the means of doing so at
       the moment of execution, using VALGRIND’s bits. Which bits do you use for
       which purpose?
10.16 Design a global exception handler that catches failing assertions and gives
      user-friendly directions on how to handle the situation. (Hint: See Shore
      (2004) for a discussion.)




 One other obvious way to conserve programmer time is to teach machines how
 to do more of the low-level work of programming.
                                                             – ERIC S. RAYMOND
                                          The Art of UNIX Programming (1999)
                                                                        CHAPTER


Detecting Anomalies
                                                                11
Although one program run can tell you quite a great deal, having multiple runs to
compare offers several opportunities for locating commonalities and anomalies—
anomalies that frequently help to locate defects. In this chapter, we discuss how to
detect anomalies in code coverage and anomalies in data accesses. We also demon-
strate how to infer invariants from multiple test runs automatically, in order to ﬂag
later invariant violations. All of these anomalies are good candidates for infection
sites.



11.1 CAPTURING NORMAL BEHAVIOR
If we have a full speciﬁcation of a program’s behavior, we can easily narrow down
an infection (as discussed in Chapter 10). So why not simply use assertions all the
way through? The following are some reasons:
■ Assertions take time to write, especially in otherwise unspeciﬁed or undocu-
  mented code.
■ Assertions over temporal properties [“Don’t call close() unless you have called
  open()”] or control ﬂow (“If you’ve taken this branch, you can’t take this other
  branch”) are difﬁcult to specify.
■ For practical purposes, assertions cannot cover all properties of the entire state

  at all times—because this would imply a speciﬁcation as complex as the original
  program (and just as likely to contain defects). Thus, there will always be gaps
  between assertions that must be explored.
    All of these limits come from the fact that assertions verify against correct
behavior, which has to be speciﬁed by humans. However, there is an alterna-
tive: rather than having assertions compare against the correct behavior we could
also have assertions compare against normal behavior, and thus detect behavior
that is abnormal (i.e., deviates from the average in some way). Such behavior is
characterized by certain properties of the program run, such as the following:
    ■   Code coverage: Code that is executed in (“abnormal”) failing runs but not in
        (“normal”) passing runs.                                                        253
254   CHAPTER 11 Detecting Anomalies



         ■ Call sequences: Sequences of function calls that occur only in (“abnormal”)
           failing runs.
         ■ Variable values: Variables that take certain (“abnormal”) values in failing runs

           only.
          Of course, knowing about abnormal behavior is not as useful as knowing about
      incorrect behavior. Incorrect behavior implies a defect,whereas abnormal behavior
      implies—well, formally nothing, just abnormal behavior. However, abnormal behav-
      ior is often a good indicator of defects, meaning that abnormal properties of a
      program run are more likely to indicate defects than normal properties of the run.
      Consequently, it is wise to ﬁrst search for anomalies and then to focus on anomalies
      for further observation or assertion.
          So, how does one capture normal behavior of a program? This is done using
      induction techniques—inferring an abstraction from multiple concrete events. In
      our case, the concrete events are program runs. The abstractions are general rules
      that apply to the runs taken into account. Typically, such techniques are applied on
      runs that pass a given test, generating abstractions for “normal” runs. A run that fails
      that test is then examined for those properties where these abstractions are not
      met, resulting in anomalies that should be focused on.
          In this chapter, we explore a number of automated techniques that use induction
      to infer abstractions from runs—and then leverage these abstractions to detect
      anomalies and potential defects. Many of these techniques are fairly recent, and are
      thus not necessarily ready for industrial primetime. Nonetheless, they should serve
      as food for thought on how debugging can be further automated. Here, we ask:

        HOW CAN WE FIND OUT WHERE A FAILING RUN DEVIATES FROM PASSING RUNS?




      11.2 COMPARING COVERAGE
      One of the simplest methods for detecting anomalies operates per the following
      logic:
         1. Every failure is caused by an infection, which again is caused by a defect.
         2. The defect must be executed in order to start the infection.
         3. Thus, code that is executed only in failing runs is more likely to contain the
            defect than code that is always executed.
      To explore this hypothesis, we need a means of checking whether code has been
      executed or not. This can easily be done using coverage tools, which instrument
      code such that the execution keeps track of all lines being executed. Such coverage
      tools are typically used for assessing the quality of a test suite.
         A test suite should execute each statement at least once, because otherwise a
      defect may not be executed. (More advanced coverage criteria demand that each
                                                      11.2 Comparing Coverage          255




EXAMPLE 11.1: The middle program returns the middle number of three
 1    // Return the middle of x, y, z
 2    int middle(int x, int y, int z) {
 3        int m = z;
 4        if (y < z) {
 5           if (x < y)
 6               m = y;
 7           else if (x < z)
 8                   m = y;
 9        } else {
10            if (x > y)
11                 m = y;
12            else if (x > z)
13                 m = x;
14        }
15        return m;
16    }
17
18    // Test driver
19    int main(int arc, char *argv[])
20    {
21        int x = atoi(argv[1]);
22        int y = atoi(argv[2]);
23        int z = atoi(argv[3]);
24        int m = middle(x, y, z);
25
26        printf("middle: %d\n", m);
27
28        return 0;
29    }


transition in the control ﬂow graph be executed at least once.) In our case, though,
we want to use such coverage tools to compare the coverage of a passing and a
failing run.
    As an ongoing example, consider the piece of code shown in Example 11.1,
computing the middle value of three numbers. This program works nicely on a
number of inputs.
     $ ./middle 3 3 5
     middle: 3
     $ _
It fails, though, on speciﬁc inputs—the middle number of 2, 1, and 3 is 2, not 1.
     $ ./middle 2 1 3
     middle: 1
     $ _
   We can now examine the code coverage of these runs, as well as a few more,
shown in Example 11.2. Each column stands for a run (with the input values at
256   CHAPTER 11 Detecting Anomalies




      EXAMPLE 11.2: Comparing coverage of multiple test runs
                                                  3   1   3   5   5   2
                                                  3   2   2   5   3   1
       2   int middle(int x, int y, int z) {      5   3   1   5   4   3
       3        int m = z;                        •   •   •   •   •   •
       4        if (y < z) {                      •   •   •   •   •   •
       5              if (x < y)                      •
       6                   m = y;                     •
       7              else if (x < z)             •               •   •
       8                   m = y;                 •                   •
       9        } else {                          •       •   •
      10              if (x > y)                          •
      11                   m = y;                         •
      12              else if (x > z)
      13                   m = x;
      14        }
      15        return m;                         •   •   •   •   •   •
      16   }                                                     
           •, •: covered statements

      Source: Jones et al. (2002).


      the top), and each circle stands for a line being executed in the run. The return
      statement in line 15, for instance, has been executed in every single run, whereas
      the assignment m = y in line 8 has been executed in both test cases 3 3 5 and
      2 1 3 (shown previously).
          This line is somewhat special, too. Every statement that has been executed in
      the failing run 2 1 3 has also been executed in passing runs. However, line 8 has
      been executed in only one passing test, whereas all other lines have been executed
      in at least two passing tests. Assuming that a statement is more normal the more
      often it is executed in passing runs (which indicates it has a low chance of starting
      an infection), line 8 is the least-normal statement.
          (You may also have noticed that lines 12 and 13 are never executed—neither in
      the failing nor in the passing run. Is this an anomaly we are looking for? No,because
      the same effect applies in passing as well as in failing runs.)
          If we actually focus on line 8 as an anomaly,we could take a look at the conditions
      under which line 8 is being executed. These are y ⬍ z (line 4), x ⭓ y (line 5), and
      x ⬍ z (line 7). In other words, y ⭐ x ⬍ z holds. Thus, the middle value is x, and in
      line 8, m should be assigned x rather than y. Line 8, the greatest anomaly regarding
      coverage, is indeed the defect that causes the failure.
          Such coverage information can be visualized to guide the user in detecting
      anomalies. Figure 11.1 showsTARANTULA,a tool for visualizing coverage anomalies.
      In TARANTULA, each nonblank character of the code is shown as a pixel. Each line
      is assigned a color hue and a brightness, indicating the anomaly level.
                                                              11.2 Comparing Coverage          257




FIGURE 11.1
Visualizing coverage anomalies with TARANTULA. Each line of code is assigned a speciﬁc
color. The “redder” a statement the stronger its execution correlates with failure. (Source:
Jones et al., 2002.)




■   Color. The redder a statement, the higher the percentage of failing test cases
    in the test cases that executed this statement. In Example 11.2, line 8 would
    get the highest amount of red, as 50 percent of the test cases that executed this
    statement failed. Lines 5, 6, and 9–11, though, would appear in green, as they
    were only executed in passing test cases.
■   Brightness. The brighter a statement, the higher the percentage of test cases
    executing this statement in all test cases. In Example 11.2, of lines 5–11,
    line 9 would obtain the highest brightness, as it was executed in the most test
    cases.
    What a TARANTULA user would be searching for, then, is bright red lines—
statements that are executed in failing test cases only. In the best of all worlds, only
a few of these lines would show up—limiting the number of lines to be examined.
In a case study, Jones et al. (2002) showed that an anomaly does not necessarily
indicate a defect, but that a defect is frequently an anomaly.
258   CHAPTER 11 Detecting Anomalies



      ■   For some defects,the percentage of abnormal code was as low as 3 percent.That
          is,starting the search at the most abnormal category,the programmer would ﬁnd
          the defect after looking at 3 percent of the code.
      ■   The most abnormal category (the 20 percent “reddest”) contained at most 20
          percent of the code. That is, comparing coverage actually yields small signiﬁcant
          differences.
      ■   Eighteen of the 20 defects were correctly classiﬁed in the most abnormal
          category—that is, the one containing 20 percent (at most) of the code.
         Thus, in this particular case study, focusing on the abnormal statements allowed
      programmers to ignore 80 percent of the code or more. Yet, one can still improve
      this. In past years,researchers have focused on the following extensions to coverage
      comparison.
      Nearest neighbor. Rather than comparing against a combination of all passing runs,
         it may be wiser to compare only against one passing run—the so-called “nearest
         neighbor.”This nearest neighbor is the passing run the coverage of which is most
         similar to the failing run. Obviously, the few remaining differences are those that
         are most strongly correlated with failure—and thus likely to point to the defect.
             In a case study, Renieris and Reiss (2003) found that the nearest-neighbor
         approach predicts defect locations better than any other method based on cov-
         erage. In 17 percent of all test runs of the so-called Siemens test suite, the
         defect location could be narrowed down to 10 percent or less of the code.
         (In Chapter 14, we see how to improve on this result.)
      Sequences. As coverage comparison points out, the code of a single method
         can be correlated with failure. Some failures, though, occur only through a
         sequence of method calls tied to a speciﬁc object.As an example,consider streams
         in JAVA. If a stream is not explicitly closed after use, its destructor will eventually
         close it. However, if too many ﬁles are left open before the garbage collector
         destroys the unused streams, ﬁle handles will run out and a failure will occur.
         This problem is indicated by a sequence of method calls. If the last access (say,
         read()) is followed by finalize(), but not close(), we have a defect.
             In a case study, Dallmeier et al. (2005) applied this technique on a test suite
         based on the JAVA NanoXML parser. They found that sequences of calls always
         predicted defects better than simply comparing coverage. Overall,the technique
         pinpointed the defective class in 36 percent of all test runs, with the same low
         cost as capturing and comparing coverage.
         As all of these ﬁgures were obtained on a small set of test programs, they do
      not generalize to larger programs. Nonetheless, these test programs serve as bench-
      marks. If a speciﬁc technique works better on a benchmark, it is likely to perform
      better on other programs. In the future, we will see more and more advanced
      coverage-comparison tools, demonstrating their advantage on benchmarks as well
      as on real-life programs.
                                                        11.3 Statistical Debugging         259




11.3 STATISTICAL DEBUGGING
In addition to simple coverage, there are other aspects to collect from actual runs.
One interesting aspect is exceptional behavior of functions—as indicated by excep-
tions being raised,or unusual values being returned. If such events frequently occur
together with failures, we might have important anomalies that point us to the
defect.
    The following is an example of how such a technique works, developed by
Liblit et al. (2003). Release 1.2 of the CCRYPT encryption tool has a defect: When
it comes to overwriting a ﬁle, CCRYPT asks the user for conﬁrmation. If the user
responds with EOF instead of yes or no, CCRYPT crashes.
     Liblit et al. attempted to use remote sampling to isolate the defect. They instru-
mented CCRYPT such that at each call site of a function it would maintain three
counters for positive, negative, or zero values returned by the function. (In C func-
tions such arithmetic sign values often differentiate whether the call was successful
or not.) When CCRYPT terminated, they would be able to tell how often each func-
tion had returned a positive, negative, or zero value. This data from 570 call sites, or
570 ⫻ 3 ⫽ 1,710 counters, would then be collected for statistical evaluation.
    To gather data from actual runs, Liblit et al. generated 2,990 random runs from
random present or absent ﬁles, randomized command-line ﬂags, and randomized
user responses (including occasional EOF conditions). These runs were classiﬁed
into failing (crashing) and passing runs.
     Liblit et al. would then examine the counters. Just as when comparing coverage
(Section 11.2), they would search for functions executed only in failing runs, but
never in passing runs—or more speciﬁcally, for functions returning a speciﬁc value
category only in failing runs. In other words, the appropriate counter is positive for
all failing runs, but always zero for passing runs.
     It turns out that in the 2,990 CCRYPT test runs, only 2 out of the 1,170 counters
satisfy the following conditions:
   ■   traverse.c:320: file_exists() ⬎ 0
   ■   traverse.c:122: xreadline() ⫽⫽ 0

In other words, the failure occurs if and only if these 2 conditions are met:
file_exists() returns true, because a ﬁle (to be overwritten) exists, and
xreadline() returns null, because the user did not provide any input.
   Such a result is an anomaly because it occurs only in failing runs. It is not a
defect, though, because both return values are perfectly legal. However, using this
knowledge we can easily follow the forward dependences from the call sites and
see where the returned values are used—and we will quickly ﬁnd that CCRYPT does
not expect xreadline() to return null.
   If we use real user input rather than random strings, we should even expect
some runs where a ﬁle exists (i.e., file_exists() ⬎ 0 holds) but where the user
provides a valid input (such as yes), resulting in xreadline() ⫽ 0 and a passing
260   CHAPTER 11 Detecting Anomalies



      run. This would imply that the predicate file_exists() ⬎ 0 is true for at least one
      passing run—and thus only xreadline() ⫽⫽ 0 would remain as the single anomaly
      correlated with the failure.




      11.4 COLLECTING DATA IN THE FIELD
      Detecting anomalies from actual executions may require a large set of runs, which
      is why these are typically generated randomly. A far better approach, though, is to
      use data collected in the ﬁeld—that is, from executions at users’ sites.
          ■ The number of executions at users’sites is typically far higher than the number
            of executions during testing.
          ■ Real-life executions produce a greater variety. In the CCRYPT example, for

            instance, the typical behavior of entering “yes” or “no” at a prompt was not
            covered by the random input.
          ■ In our networked world,collecting and gathering data can easily be automated,

            as well as the analysis.
          ■ Gathering information from users’runs gives a ﬁrsthand indication about how

            the software is being used—information otherwise difﬁcult to obtain.
          ■ As a side effect,the makers of a software product learn which features are most

            frequently used and which are not—an important factor when determining
            the impact of a problem (see Section 2.4 in Chapter 2).
         In principle, there is no limit to the information that can be collected. Excep-
      tional behavior such as crashes is certainly valuable to the provider (see Section 2.2
      in Chapter 2). However, to statistically correlate such exceptional behavior with
      other aspects of the program run one may also want to monitor function execution
      or data values.
         It is not wise to log everything, though. Two issues have to be considered:
      ■   Privacy. Users have a right to privacy, and are very conscious of privacy issues.
          Section 2.2 in Chapter 2 has details on these issues and how to address them.
      ■   Performance. Collecting data impacts the local performance of the system. In
          addition, forwarding large amounts of collected data over the network entails
          costs.To improve performance,one can focus on a speciﬁc part of the product—
          for instance, collect data only from a few components rather than the entire
          system. Instead of collecting all data, one can also sample the logs such that
          each user executes only a small fraction of the collecting statements.
         This sampling approach is actually quite effective. In the CCRYPT example from
      Section 11.3,Liblit et al. would conduct an experiment in which only 1 out of 1,000
      return values of a function was sampled. The impact on performance is less than
      4 percent. Of course, sampling only 1 out of 1,000 function returns requires a large
      number of runs.
                                                                        11.4 Collecting Data in the Field   261




                                     140


                                     120




  Number of ‘‘good’’ features left
                                     100


                                      80


                                      60


                                      40


                                      20


                                       0
                                           0   500   1000         1500            2000   2500      3000
                                                     Number of successful trials used

FIGURE 11.2
Narrowing down predicates. Crosses mark means; error bars mark one standard deviation.


    Figure 11.2 shows how the function counters discussed in Section 11.3 are
eliminated as the number of runs increases. The process starts with 141 out of
1,710 counters that are ever nonzero. One then adds data from one random run
after another. After having considered 1,750 runs, the set of remaining predicates
has gone down to 20, and after 2,600 runs just 5 are left. Again, these 5 predicates
are strongly correlated with failure.
    Overall,the results so far demonstrate that statistical sampling can be a powerful,
low-overhead tool for detecting anomalies in the ﬁeld. Now all one needs is users
who are willing to have their runs sampled. Liblit et al. (2005) state that “relatively
few runs (we used 32,000) are sufﬁcient to isolate all of the bugs described in this
paper.”
    There are situations, though, where several thousand runs are easy to sample. In
particular, a centralized Web service may be called thousands of times a day—and
since there is just one program instance doing the actual work behind the scenes,
instrumenting a sample of runs is pretty straightforward, as is collecting data of
actual failures. In practice, this means that you get anomalies almost for free—and
the higher the number of runs, the more signiﬁcant the correlation of features and
failures will be.
262   CHAPTER 11 Detecting Anomalies




      11.5 DYNAMIC INVARIANTS
      So far, we have seen how speciﬁc aspects of multiple runs can be collected to
      detect anomalies.Another approach for leveraging multiple runs is to generate likely
      speciﬁcations that hold for all runs and to see whether these can be turned into
      general assertions—which can then be used to detect anomalies.
          How does one generate speciﬁcations from actual runs? A simple yet highly
      effective approach has been implemented in the DAIKON tool by Ernst et al. (2001).
      The main idea behind DAIKON is to discover invariants that hold for all observed
      runs. These invariants come in the form of pre- and postconditions. They can be
      converted into assertions to check for abnormal behavior. To see what DAIKON
      does, consider the following piece of code.
         public static int ex1511(int[] b, int n)
         {
             int s = 0;
             int i = 0;
             while (i != n) {
                 s = s + b[i];
                 i = i + 1;
             }
             return s;
         }
          What does this code do? We create a set of concrete runs, processing 100 ran-
      domly generated arrays with a length from 7 to 13 and elements from [⫺100, ⫹100].
      Running DAIKON on these runs yields two invariants. First is the inferred precon-
      dition for ex1511():
         Ex.ex1511(int[], int):::ENTER
         n == size(b[])
         b != null
         n <= 13
         n >= 7
         ...
         Obviously, n is the size of the array b[].This could serve as an assertion,assuming
      we can access the size of b[]. In addition, in the runs observed n is always in the
      range from 7 to 13—but this is obviously an artifact of the runs we observed. The
      second invariant is the postcondition for ex1511():
         Ex.ex1511(int[], int):::EXIT
         b[] == orig(b[])
         return == sum(b[])
         ...
         In the ﬁrst invariant, the orig(b[]) clause stands for the “original” value of
      b[]—that is, as the function was entered—and the invariant properly states that
      ex1511() did not change b[]’s values. The second invariant states that the return
      value of ex1511() is always the sum (sum()) of the elements of b[]—and this is
      precisely what ex1511() does.
                                                                11.5 Dynamic Invariants       263



                                                     Given
                    Test suite                     invariants




                                       Trace                          Likely
     Program                            file                        invariants
                   Instrumentor
                                                      Detect
                     Execute                        invariants
                     program
                                                                                  User

FIGURE 11.3
How DAIKON works. The instrumented program generates a trace ﬁle, from which DAIKON
extracts the invariants.


   How does DAIKON detect these invariants? The general process, as follows, is
shown in Figure 11.3.

1. The program to be observed is instrumented at runtime such that all values of all
   variables at all entries and exits of all functions are logged to a trace ﬁle. For C and
   JAVA programs, DAIKON uses binary instrumentation techniques built on top of
   VALGRIND (see Section 10.8.3 in Chapter 10). For PERL programs,DAIKON adds
   instrumentation to the source code in a preprocessing step.
2. When executing the program under a test suite,the instrumented code generates
   a trace ﬁle.
3. DAIKON processes this trace ﬁle. DAIKON maintains a library of invariant pat-
   terns over variables and constants. Each of these patterns can be instantiated
   with different variables and constants.
   ■ Method speciﬁcations come as pre- and postconditions. They can apply to:


     – Primitive data such as integers. They compare at most three variables with
       constants and other variables, as in:
              x = 6;     x ∈ {2, 5, ---30}
              x < y;     y = 5 * x + 10;
              z = 4 * x + 12 * y + 3;
              z = fn(x, y).
     – Composite data such as sequences, arrays, or lists. For instance,
       A subsequence B; x ∈ A; A is sorted.
   ■ Object invariants such as the following.

         string.content[string.length] = ’\0’;
         node.left.value ⭐ node.right.value
         this.next.last = this
        Just as method speciﬁcations, object invariants can apply to primitive as
     well as composite data.
264   CHAPTER 11 Detecting Anomalies



              For each variable (or tuple of variables), DAIKON maintains a set of potential
         invariants, initially consisting of all invariants. At each execution point under
         consideration, for each value recorded in the trace, DAIKON checks each inva-
         riant in the set to determine whether it still holds. If it does not,DAIKON removes
         it from the set.
              During this process, DAIKON checks individual variables as well as derived
         variables, such as orig(b[]) or sum(b[]) in the previous example. Derived
         variables also include the return values of functions,to be used in postconditions.
      4. While detecting invariants, DAIKON makes some optimizations to make the
         remaining invariants as relevant as possible. In particular, if some invariant A
         implies an invariant B, then B need not be reported.
      5. After DAIKON has fully processed the trace ﬁle, the invariants that remain are
         those that held for all execution points.
      6. DAIKON ranks the invariants by the number of times they actually occurred. An
         invariant detected 100 times is less likely to be a random effect than an invariant
         detected 3 times.
      7. DAIKON reports the relevant and ranked invariants to the user. The invariants
         can be fed into another tool for further processing.

         The beneﬁts of this technique are as clear as its drawbacks. The most obvious
      drawback of DAIKON is that the invariants it detects are those built into its library.
      DAIKON cannot generate new abstractions on its own. For instance, DAIKON can
      discover that “at the end of shell_sort(), the value is sorted”(sample.c in Exam-
      ple 1.1), but not that “the value returned is the middle number” (middle.c in
      Example 11.1). This is because DAIKON knows about “sorted” things but not about
      “middle” numbers. It just lacks the appropriate vocabulary.
          It is not too difﬁcult to extend DAIKON ’s vocabulary by concepts such as middle
      elements. In general, as long as some property can be observed it can be added to
      DAIKON’s invariant library. However, the more properties there are to be checked
      (as well as possible combinations thereof) the longer DAIKON has to run. In regard
      to the current library, invariant detection time for each program point is cubic in
      the number of variables that are in scope at this point (as patterns involve three
      variables at most). Thus, a large number of invariants on a large number of variables
      will quickly bring DAIKON to its knees. Thus, users need to apply DAIKON to the
      portion of the code that interests them most.
          For the user, the central problem is to assess the reported invariants. Are these
      true facts that hold for every possible execution (which is what users are typi-
      cally interested in), or do the invariants just hold for the examined runs? On the
      other hand, if the examined runs are typical for the general behavior, all reported
      invariants will be helpful for understanding this general behavior.
          Keeping these issues in mind,DAIKON is a great tool for program understanding
      and for summarizing the properties of several runs in a few conditions. DAIKON can
      output its assertions in JML format,which JML tools (see Section 10.6 in Chapter 10)
      can thus check for other runs—for failing runs, for instance, as well as for new runs
                                                        11.6 Invariants on-the-Fly         265



of a changed version.Whenever a speciﬁcation is required but a test suite is available,
the invariants inferred by DAIKON come in handy as a ﬁrst take.



11.6 INVARIANTS ON-THE-FLY
A question not yet answered is whether dynamic invariants can be directly used
for anomaly detection—without ﬁrst selecting those that are useful as general spec-
iﬁcations. In the CCRYPT example from Section 11.3, we showed how function
return values can be correlated with actual failures. Such return values can also be
detected and summarized, making dynamic invariants a potential tool for automatic
anomaly detection.
   This idea has been explored in the DIDUCE prototype of Hangal and Lam (2002).
DIDUCE is built for efﬁciency, and primarily geared toward anomaly detection. It
works for a very speciﬁc set of invariants only, but has been demonstrated to be
effective in detecting anomalies.
    Just like DAIKON, DIDUCE instruments the code of the program in question. In
contrast to DAIKON, though, DIDUCE works on-the-ﬂy—that is, invariants are com-
puted while the program is executed. For each instrumented place in the program,
DIDUCE stores three items:

Coverage. DIDUCE counts the number of times the place was executed.
Values. For each accessed variable, DIDUCE stores the found value of the variable
   read or written.This value is converted to an integer,if necessary,and then stored
   as a pair (V , M), where
   ■ V is the initial value ﬁrst written to the variable, and

   ■ M is a mask representing the range of values (the ith bit is 0 if a difference

      was found in the ith bit, and 1 if the same value has always been observed for
      that bit).
   Formally, if the ﬁrst value of a variable is W , then M :⫽ ¬0 and V :⫽ W hold. With
   each new assignment W  , the mask M becomes M :⫽ M ∧ ¬(W  ⊗ V ), where ⊗
   is the exclusive-or operation.
       The following is an example. If some variable i is ﬁrst assigned a value of 16,
   then V ⫽ 16 ⫽ 10000 (in binary representation) holds (M is initially ¬0 ⫽ 11111).
   If i is later assigned a value of 18, V is still unchanged, but in M the second bit
   is cleared because the difference between V and 18 is the second bit. Thus, M
   becomes 11101.
Difference. For each variable, DIDUCE additionally stores the difference between
   the previous value and the new value. These are again stored as a pair (V , M), as
   described previously.
        If i’s value changes from 16 to 18, as described previously, the initial differ-
   ence V is 2. In the mask M, all bits are set (M ⫽ ¬0). If i’s value now increases
   to 21, the new difference between old and new value is 21 ⫺ 18 ⫽ 3. The ﬁrst bit
   in M is cleared because the increases 2 and 3 differ in the ﬁrst bit.
266   CHAPTER 11 Detecting Anomalies




            Table 11.1 Collecting Invariants in DIDUCE
                                      Value        Difference
            Code          i     V             M   V       M             Invariant
            i = 10;     1010   1010     …11111    –/–    –/–               i ⫽ 10
            i += 1;     1011   1010     …11110    1     …11111   10 ⭐ i ⭐ 11 ∧ |i  ⫺ i| ⫽ 1
            i += 1;     1100   1010     …11000    1     …11111    8 ⭐ i ⭐ 15 ∧ |i  ⫺ i| ⫽ 1
            i += 1;     1101   1010     …11000    1     …11111    8 ⭐ i ⭐ 15 ∧ |i  ⫺ i| ⫽ 1
            i += 2;     1111   1010     …11000    1     …11101    8 ⭐ i ⭐ 15 ∧ |i  ⫺ i| ⭐ 2



          The masks, as collected during a program run, imply ranges of values and
      differences that can easily be translated into invariants over values and differences.
      Table 11.1 outlines how the mask bits become more and more cleared as value vari-
      ation progresses. Due to the representation, the ranges are not as exact as could be.
      The representation, though, is very cost effective. The runtime overhead is limited
      to a few memory operations and simple logical operations for each instrumentation
      point, and the slowdown factor reported by Hangal and Lam (2002) lies between
      6 and 20.
          Once one has collected the invariants and ﬁnalized the M masks, this repre-
      sentation is just as effective for reporting invariant violations. Whenever DIDUCE
      observes further variation of M, it reports a violation. Thus, each value or difference
      out of the range observed previously becomes an anomaly.
          Although far more limited than DAIKON, the invariant violations reported by
      DIDUCE have successfully uncovered defects in a number of programs. The follow-
      ing is an example reported by Hangal and Lam (2002). A multiprocessor simulator
      exhibited rare and presumably random cache errors. Running DIDUCE in a time
      interval where no failures occurred resulted in a set of invariants. These invariants
      were then checked in an overnight run of DIDUCE. It turned out that one violation
      was produced: a status line, which was usually 0 or 1, suddenly turned out to be 2,
      and a failure occurred. It turned out that the programmer had not checked this
      condition properly, and the anomaly reported by DIDUCE quickly pointed him to
      the defect.
          As DIDUCE accumulates invariants during a run, and can be switched from
      “learning” to “detection” mode without interrupting the application, it is particu-
      larly easy to use. In particular, users can start using DIDUCE at the start of the
      debugging process and can switch between inferring and checking during a run.



      11.7 FROM ANOMALIES TO DEFECTS
      An anomaly is not a defect,and it is not a failure cause.Yet,an anomaly can be a good
      starting point for reasoning.
                                                                  11.8 Concepts        267



   ■ Does the anomaly indicate an infection? If so,we can trace the dependences
     back to the origins.
   ■ Could the anomaly cause a failure? If so, we must understand the effects

     of the anomaly—for instance, by following the forward dependences through
     the program.
   ■ Could the anomaly be a side effect of a defect? If so, we must trace back the

     anomaly to the common origin of failure and anomaly.
   Overall, the case studies in this chapter have shown that abnormal properties of
a program run are more likely to indicate defects than normal properties of the run.
Therefore,whenever we have the choice of multiple events we should ﬁrst focus on
the abnormal ones—and using scientiﬁc method set up an experiment that checks
whether the anomaly causes the failure.


11.8 CONCEPTS
As defects are likely to cause abnormal behavior, anomalies frequently point to
defects.
   Anomalies are neither defects nor failure causes, but can strongly correlate with
either.
To determine abnormal behavior, determine the normal behavior of passing runs How To
   and see how the failing run(s) differ. This can be done
    ■ by comparing the summarized properties directly, or

    ■ by turning the properties into assertions, which can then be used to detect

      anomalies in failing runs.
To summarize behavior, use inductive techniques that summarize the properties
   of several program runs into an abstraction that holds for all of these runs.
To detect anomalies, researchers so far have focused on coverage, function return
   values, and data invariants.
To compare coverage, instrument a program and summarize the coverage for the
   passing and for the failing runs. Concentrate on statements executed in failing
   runs only.
To sample return values, at each call site count the numbers within each category
   of return values. Focus on those categories that occur only in the failing runs.
To collect data from the ﬁeld, use a sampling strategy such that the impact on
   performance is minimized.
To determine invariants, use DAIKON or a similar tool to check whether given
   invariants hold at the instrumentation points.
   Whenever we have the choice of multiple events, we should ﬁrst focus on the
abnormal ones.
   The techniques discussed in this chapter are fairly recent and not yet fully
evaluated.
268   CHAPTER 11 Detecting Anomalies




      11.9 TOOLS
      DAIKON. The DAIKON tool by Ernst et al. (2001) has had a tremendous impact
        on the ﬁeld of dynamic program analysis—not only because of its fea-
        tures but because it is available for download. The DAIKON project page
        offers software, instructions, and papers on the subject. It is found at
        http://groups.csail.mit.edu/pag/daikon/.
      DIDUCE. The DIDUCE tool by Hangal and Lam (2002) is no longer available for
        download. Its old home page is available at http://diduce.sourceforge.net/.



      11.10 FURTHER READING
      Dynamic program analysis has taken off as a discipline only in the last decade—an
      explosion largely due to the wealth of computing power we have today (“Why not
      simply run the program 2,000 times?”) and to the presence of cheap communication
      (“Let’s collect all data from all users”). As becomes clear in this chapter,the individual
      approaches are yet isolated,and it is unclear which approach is best suited for which
      situation. Yet, the tools and techniques merit to be experimented with—to see how
      they can help with user’s programs.
          The TARANTULA tool, developed by Jones et al. (2002), was the ﬁrst tool to
      visualize and leverage code coverage for detecting faults. Jones et al. offer several
      details on the tool and a conducted case study.
          Renieris and Reiss (2003) introduced the “nearest-neighbor” concept. I also
      recommend their paper because of the careful and credible evaluation method.
      Sequences of method calls were investigated by Dallmeier et al. (2005).
          Liblit et al. (2003) were the ﬁrst to introduce sampling for detecting failures.
      They describe details of the approach as well as additional case studies. At the time
      of writing, you could download instrumented versions of common programs that
      would report sampled coverage data—thus helping researchers to isolate defects in
      these applications. See http://sample.cs.berkeley.edu/.
          Remote sampling is also addressed in the GAMMA project under the name
      of software tomography (Orso et al., 2003). GAMMA primarily focuses on sam-
      pling coverage information such that the coverage comparison (as described in
      Section 11.2) can be deployed on a large number of runs.
          Podgurski et al. (2003) apply statistical feature selection, clustering, and multi-
      variate visualization techniques to the task of classifying software failure reports.
      The idea is to bucket each report into an equivalence group believed to share the
      same underlying cause. As in GAMMA, features are derived from execution traces.
          In addition to DAIKON and DIDUCE, other approaches for extracting behavior
      models from actual runs have been researched—although not necessarily with the
      purpose of ﬁnding defects. Ammons et al. (2002), for instance, describe how to
                                                          11.10 Further Reading          269



construct state machines from observed runs that can be used as speciﬁcations
for veriﬁcation purposes. Such state machines may also be helpful in uncovering
anomalies.
    Finally, it is also possible to create abstractions both for passing and failing
runs—and then to check a new run as to whether it is closer to one category than
the other, effectively predicting whether the run will pass or fail. This can be use-
ful for discovering latent defects or otherwise undesirable behavior. Dickinson et al.
(2001) describe how to use cluster analysis to predict failures. Brun and Ernst (2004)
show how to classify the features of program properties to “learn from ﬁxes.” If a
program shows properties similar to those that have been ﬁxed in the past, these
properties are also likely to be ﬁxed.



EXERCISES
11.1 Using your own words, compare (1) anomaly detection by comparing cov-
     erage and (2) anomaly detection by dynamically determined invariants, in
     terms of:
     (a) Efﬁciency
     (b) Applicability to a wide range of programs.
     (c) Effectiveness in locating defects.
11.2 Sometimes, bugs reappear that have been ﬁxed before. How can regression
     testing be used to prevent this? How can regression testing help to detect
     anomalies?
11.3 Discuss:
     ■ How assertions could be used to detect anomalies.
     ■ Why and why not to use them throughout the program run.


11.4 We have seen that detected anomalies do not necessarily indicate defects
     (false positives). Explain this phenomenon. What would be false negatives,
     and how can we explain those?
11.5 What is the basic idea of invariant analysis? What are the advantages and
     disadvantages of dynamic compared to static techniques?
11.6    Use DAIKON to detect invariants in the bigbang program (Example 8.3).
        Note that you may need to resolve memory issues ﬁrst.
11.7    DAIKON generates a huge number of invariants. What techniques does it
        use to reduce that number to relevant invariants? Explain the effectiveness
        of the techniques.
11.8    Consider the sample code from Example 1.1 in explaining the effectiveness
        of DAIKON and DIDUCE. Discuss strengths and limitations of both tools.
270   CHAPTER 11 Detecting Anomalies



       11.9 Compare DAIKON and DIDUCE regarding efﬁciency, usability, scalability,
            performance, and reliability of the results. Discuss when to use which
            approach.
      11.10 Use the PYTHON sys.settrace() facility discussed in Section 8.5 to com-
            pare coverage, as in TARANTULA (Section 11.2). Test your approach on
            the middle program (which you reimplement in PYTHON ) and the runs
            shown in Figure 11.2. When comparing coverage, do you observe the same
            anomalies?
      11.11 Use the PYTHON sys.settrace() facility discussed in Section 8.5 to check
            variable ranges,as in DIDUCE (Section 11.6).Apply it on a PYTHON program
            of your choice and compute the induced overhead.




       If you never know failure, how can you know success?
                                                               – The Matrix (1999)
                                                                          CHAPTER


Causes and Effects
                                                                  12
Deduction, observation, and induction are all good in ﬁnding potential defects.
However, none of these techniques alone is sufﬁcient to determine a failure cause.
How does one identify a cause? How does one isolate not only a cause but the actual
cause of a failure? This chapter lays the groundwork on how to ﬁnd failure causes
systematically—and automatically.



12.1 CAUSES AND ALTERNATE WORLDS
Anomalies and defects, as discussed in the previous chapters, are all good starting
points in a debugging session. However,we do not know yet whether these actually
cause the failure in question.
    If we say “a defect causes a failure,”what does “cause”mean? Generally speaking,
a cause is an event preceding another event without which the event in question
(the effect) would not have occurred. Thus, a defect causes the failure if the failure
would not have occurred without the defect.
    Because most of debugging is the search for a defect that causes the failure, we
must understand how to search for cause–effect relationships. That is, to search for
causality—with the idea that once we found a cause, the defect is not far away.
    In natural and social sciences, causality is often difﬁcult to establish. Just think
about common disputes such as“Did usage of the butterﬂy ballot inWest Palm Beach
cause George W. Bush to be president of the United States?”;“Did drugs cause the
death of Elvis Presley?”; “Does human production of carbon dioxide cause global
warming?”
    To determine whether these are actually causes, formally we would have to
repeat history without the cause in question—in an alternate world that is as close
as possible to ours except for the cause. Using this counterfactual model of causality,
a cause becomes a difference between the two worlds (Figure 12.1):
   ■   A world where the effect occurs.
   ■   An alternate world where the effect does not occur.
   We know already what our actual world looks like. However,if in alternate worlds
Albert Gore had been president, Elvis were alive, and global warming were less             271
272   CHAPTER 12 Causes and Effects



            Failing world


                            Causes for
                             failure        Common context        Causes for
                                                                  nonfailure

                                                                               Passing world

      FIGURE 12.1
      Causes as differences between alternate worlds.


      (and not changing anything else), we would know that butterﬂy ballots, drugs, and
      carbon dioxide had been actual causes for the given effects.
          Unfortunately, we cannot repeat history like an experiment in a lab. We have
      to speculate about what would have happened. We can have all experts in the
      world agree with our speculation, but in the real, nondeterministic, and, above all,
      nonrepeatable world, one can never absolutely know whether a probable cause is a
      cause. This is why one can always come up with a new theory about the true cause,
      and this is why some empirical researchers have suggested dropping the concept
      of causality altogether.
          In our domain of computer science, though, things are different. We can easily
      repeat program runs over and over, change the circumstances of the execution as
      desired, and observe the effects. Given the right means (Chapter 4), the program
      execution is under (almost) total control and is (almost) totally deterministic. (The
      “almost” is there because the execution may still be determined by physical effects,
      as described in Section 4.3.8 in Chapter 4.)
          Scientists frequently use computers to determine causes and effects in models
      of the real world. However, such causes and effects run the danger of being inap-
      propriate in the concrete, because the model may have abstracted away important
      aspects. If we are determining causes and effects in the program itself, though, we
      keep abstraction to a minimum. Typically, we only abstract away the irreproducible
      physical effects. Minimal abstraction implies minimal risk.Thus,among all scientiﬁc
      disciplines debugging is the one that can best claim to deal with actual causality.
      In the remainder of this chapter, we shall thus address the key question:

        HOW DO I KNOW SOMETHING CAUSES THE FAILURE IN QUESTION?




      12.2 VERIFYING CAUSES
      How do we check whether some anomaly—or, more generally, any property of a
      program run—causes the failure in question? The actual world in which the effect
      occurs is our real world—with the effect, the failing run, occurring before our eyes.
                                                        12.3 Causality in Practice        273



The alternate world, though, is what we need to show that some property causes
the failure. To show causality, we must set up an experiment with an alternate
world in which the property does not occur. If in this alternate world the failure
does not occur either, we have shown that the property caused the failure.
    As an example,consider a program that emits a warning message (say,“Conﬁgura-
tion ﬁle not found”) and then fails. How do we show that the missing conﬁguration
ﬁle causes the failure? We set up an alternate world in which a conﬁguration ﬁle is
present. In other words, we set up an experiment to support or refute our hypoth-
esis about causality. If (and only if) in our experiment the failure no longer occurs
have we shown causality (i.e., that the missing ﬁle caused the failure).
   This reasoning may sound trivial at ﬁrst (“Of course, we need such an experi-
ment!”),but having such an explicit veriﬁcation step is crucial for avoiding fallacies.
In our example,it would only be natural to assume that the warning message is some-
how connected to the failure—especially if the warning is all we can observe—and
thus attempt to resolve the warning in the hope of resolving the failure.
   This type of reasoning is called post hoc ergo propter hoc (“after this, therefore
because of this”). This means that an anomaly has occurred before the failure, and
therefore the anomaly must have caused the failure. However, it may well be that
the warning is totally unrelated to the failure. In that case, resolving the warning
will cost us precious time. Therefore, any systematic procedure will ﬁrst determine
causality by an experiment, as described previously.



12.3 CAUSALITY IN PRACTICE
The following is a somewhat more elaborate example. Consider the following piece
of C code.
   a = compute_value();
   printf("a = %d\n", a);
    This piece of code invokes the compute_value() function, assigns the result to
the variable a, and prints the value of a on the console. When executed, it prints
a = 0 on the console, although a is not supposed to be zero. What is the cause for
a = 0 being printed?
    Deducing from the program code (see Chapter 7),we may reason that if variable
a is zero we must examine the origin of this value. Following back the dependences
from a, we ﬁnd that the last assignment was from compute_value(), and thus we
might investigate how compute_value() can return a zero value. Unfortunately,
it turns out that compute_value() is not supposed to return zero. Thus, we may
proceed digging into the compute_value() code to ﬁnd out how the zero came
to be.
    Unfortunately, reasoning alone does not sufﬁce for proving causality. We must
show by experiment that if a cause is not present,an effect is not present.Therefore,
we must show that a being zero is the cause for a = 0 being printed. Later on, we
274   CHAPTER 12 Causes and Effects



      would show that compute_value() returning zero is the cause for a being zero—
      and each of these causalities must be shown by an experiment (or,at least,additional
      observation).
           At this point, this may seem like nitpicking. Isn’t it obvious that a is zero? After
      all, we print its value on the console. Unfortunately,“obvious” is not enough. “Obvi-
      ously,” the program should work, but it does not. Thus, we can trust nothing, and
      especially not the obvious.
           Let’s then attempt to show causality using scientiﬁc method. We set up a
      hypothesis:

                        a being zero is the cause for a ⫽ 0 being printed.

         To show that this hypothesis holds, we must set up an experiment in which a is
      not zero, and in which a = 0 is not being printed. Let’s do so by inserting a little
      assignment a = 1 into the code. This results in our ﬁrst alternate world:
           a = compute_value();
           a = 1;
           printf("a = %d\n", a);
         If the program now prints a = 1, we know that a being zero was the cause for
      a = 0 being printed. However, if we execute this piece of code we ﬁnd that a = 0
      is still being printed, regardless of the inserted assignment.
          This is weird. How can this happen? We set up a new hypothesis:

                       a ⫽ 0 is being printed regardless of the value of a.

        To prove this hypothesis, we could set a to various values other than 1—and
      we would ﬁnd that the hypothesis always holds. This means that there must be
      something wrong with the printf() invocation. And there is. a is declared a
      ﬂoating-point variable:
           double a;
      ..
       .
           a = compute_value();
           a = 1;
           printf("a = %d\n", a);
         However,the argument "%d" makes printf() expect an integer value as a next
      argument. If we pass a ﬂoating-point value instead, this means that only the ﬁrst
      four bytes of the ﬂoating-point representation are being read—and interpreted as
      an integer. (In fact, this type of mistake is so common that many compilers issue
      a warning when the printf() format string does not match the later arguments.)
      What happens on this speciﬁc machine is that the ﬁrst four bytes of the internal
      representation of 1.0 (and any other small integer) are all zero—and thus a = 0 is
      printed regardless of the value of a.
         But all this, again, is yet only reasoning. Our working hypothesis becomes:

                     T he format "%d" is the cause for a = 0 being printed.
                                                     12.4 Finding Actual Causes          275



   To prove the hypothesis,we must again set up an experiment in which the cause
does not occur. In other words, we must alter the program to make the failure go
away. A proper format for ﬂoating-point values in printf() is "%f". Let’s alter the
format to this value:
   a = compute_value();
   printf("a = %f\n", a);
    Now that the cause "%d" is no longer present, the actual value of a is being
printed on the console. That is, the effect of printing a = 0 is gone. This means that
"%d" actually was the cause of a = 0 being printed. In other words, "%d" was the
defect that caused the failure. Our ﬁnal hypothesis has become a theory about the
failure cause. Note how the use of scientiﬁc method (Chapter 6) prevents fallacies
from the start, as every hypothesis (about a failure cause) must be veriﬁed by an
experiment (with an alternate world in which the cause does not occur).
    As pointed out in Section 12.1, detecting causes in the real world is difﬁcult,
essentially because one cannot turn back history and see what would have happened
in the alternate world. This is why the counterfactual deﬁnition of causality is often
deemed too restrictive. In the context of debugging, though, we can repeat runs
over and over. In fact, conducting experiments with alternate worlds is a necessary
effect of applying scientiﬁc method. Thus, in debugging, experiments are the only
way to show causality. Deduction and speculation do not sufﬁce.



12.4 FINDING ACTUAL CAUSES
Now that we have discussed how to verify a cause,let’s turn to the central problem:
How do we ﬁnd a failure cause? It turns out that ﬁnding a cause is trivial. The
problem is to ﬁnd the cause among a number of alternatives.
    In debugging, as in experimental science, the only way to determine whether
something is a cause is through an experiment.Thus,for example,only by changing
the program in Section 6.3 in Chapter 6 could we prove that the defect was actually
the cause of the failure.
   This conjunction of causes and changes raises an important problem. Just as
there are inﬁnitely many ways of writing a program, there are inﬁnitely many ways
of changing a program such that a failure no longer occurs. Because each of these
changes implies a failure cause, there are inﬁnitely many failure causes. For exam-
ple, how can we say that something is the defect or the cause of a failure, as "%d"
in Section 12.3?
   ■ We could also say that the printf() statement as a whole is a cause for printing
     a = 0, because if we remove it nothing is printed.
   ■ Anomalies, as discussed in Chapter 11, are a cause of a failure because without

     anomalies (i.e., in a “normal” run) the failure does not occur.
   ■ We can treat the entire program code as a cause, because we can rewrite it

     from scratch such that it works.
276   CHAPTER 12 Causes and Effects



         ■   Electricity, mathematics, and the existence of computers are all failure causes,
             because without them, there would be no program run and thus no failure.
           This multitude of causes is unfortunate and confusing. In debugging, and espe-
      cially in automated debugging, we would like to point out a single failure cause, not
      a multitude of trivial alternatives.
           To discriminate among these alternatives, the concept of the closest possible
      world comes in handy. A world is said to be“closer”to the actual world than another
      if it resembles the actual world more than the other does. The idea is that now the
      cause should be a minimal difference between the actual world where the effect
      occurs and the alternate world where it would not (Figure 12.1). In other words,
      the alternate world should be as close as possible. Therefore, we deﬁne an actual
      cause as a difference between the actual world where the effect occurs, and the
      closest possible world where it would not.
           Another way of thinking about an actual cause is that whenever we have the
      choice between two causes we can pick the one of which the alternate world
      is closer. Consequently, "%d" is the defect, but the printf() statement is not—
      because altering just the format string is a smaller difference than removing the
      printf() statement. Likewise, the absence of electricity would result in a world
      that is quite different from ours. Thus, electricity would not qualify as an actual
      failure cause. This principle of picking the closer alternate world is also known as
      Ockham’s Razor,which states that whenever you have competing theories for how
      some effect comes to be, pick the simplest.



      12.5 NARROWING DOWN CAUSES
      Let’s now put these general concepts of causality into practice. Given some failure
      (i.e.,the effect),how do we ﬁnd an actual cause?A simple strategy works as follows:
         1. Find an alternate world in which the effect does not occur.
         2. Narrow down the initial difference to an actual cause, using scientiﬁc
            method (Chapter 6).
          If you think that this sounds almost too trivial, you are right. The alternate world
      is where the effect does not occur—is not this just what we aim at? Think about a
      defect causing the failure, for instance. If we have an alternate world in which the
      defect does not occur, we are already set. Why bother dealing with the differences
      to the real world if we already know what the alternate world is supposed to be?
          The trick is that the alternate world need not be a world in which the program
      has been corrected. It sufﬁces that the failure does not occur—which implies that
      there is some other difference either in the program input or its execution that
      eventually causes the differing behavior with respect to the failure. The challenge
      is to identify this initial difference, which can then be narrowed down to an actual
      cause.
                                                      12.7 The Common Context             277




12.6 A NARROWING EXAMPLE
The following is a little example that illustrates this approach. When I give a presen-
tation, I use a little shareware program on my laptop such that I can remote-control
the presentation with my Bluetooth phone. (Sometimes it’s fun to be a nerd.) Hav-
ing upgraded this program recently, I found that it quit after moving to the next
slide. I exchanged a few emails with the author of the shareware. He was extremely
helpful and committed, but was not able to reproduce my problem. In his setting
(and in the setting of the other users), everything worked ﬁne.
    To narrow down the cause, I searched for an alternate world in which the failure
did not occur. It turned out that if I created a new user account from scratch, using
all of the default settings, the program worked ﬁne. Thus, I had a workaround—but
I also had a cause, as this alternate account (the alternate world) differed from my
account in a number of settings and preferences.
    Just having a cause, though, did not help me in ﬁxing the problem. I wanted
an actual cause. Thus, I had to narrow down the difference between the accounts,
and so I copied setting after setting from my account to the new account, check-
ing each time whether the failure would occur. In terms of scientiﬁc method, the
hypothesis in each step was that the respective setting caused the problem,and with
each new copied setting not showing the failure I disproved one hypothesis after
another.
    Finally,though,I was successful:copying the keyboard settings from my account
to the new account caused the failure to occur. Mostly living in Germany,I occasion-
ally have to write text in German, using words with funny characters such as those
in “Schöne Grüße” (best regards). To type these characters quickly, I have crafted
my own keyboard layout such that simple key combinations such as Alt+O or Alt+S
give me the ö or ß character, respectively. Copying this layout setting to the new
user account resulted in the failure of the shareware program.
    Thus, I had an actual cause—the difference between the previous setting and
the new setting—and this diagnosis was what I emailed the shareware author (who
had explored some other alternatives in the meantime). He committed to support
such hand-crafted layouts in the future, and everybody was happy.




12.7 THE COMMON CONTEXT
As the example in Section 12.6 illustrates, we do not necessarily need an alternate
world in which the defect is ﬁxed. It sufﬁces to have some alternate world in which
the failure does not occur—as long as we can narrow down the initial difference
to an actual cause.
   This initial difference sets the frame in which to search for the actual cause.
Aspects that do not differ will be part of the common context and thus never
changed nor isolated as causes. This context is much larger than may be expected.
278   CHAPTER 12 Causes and Effects



      Our common context includes, for instance, the fact that the program is executed,
      and all other facts required to make the execution possible. One can also think
      about the common context as deﬁning necessary conditions that must be satisﬁed
      by every alternate world.Anything that is not part of the common context can differ,
      and thus sets the search space—such as the settings in my user account.
          In many cases, we have the choice between multiple alternate worlds. For
      instance, I may ﬁnd out that some earlier version of the shareware program works
      nicely, such that I could narrow down the difference between the old and new
      version—with the settings unchanged. I could try different devices and leave every-
      thing else unchanged. Perhaps the failure occurs only with speciﬁc devices? The
      choice of an alternate world sets the search space in which to ﬁnd causes. What-
      ever alternate world is chosen, one should strive to keep it as similar as possible
      to the actual world—simply because Ockham’s Razor tells you that this gives you
      the best chance of ﬁnding the failure cause.



      12.8 CAUSES IN DEBUGGING
      The concepts actual cause and closest possible world are applicable to all causes—
      including the causes required for debugging.Thus,if we want to ﬁnd the actual cause
      for a program failure we have to search for the closest possible world in which the
      failure does not occur.
      ■   Input. The actual failure cause in a program input is a minimal difference
          between the actual input (where the failure occurs) and the closest possible
          input where the failure does not occur.
      ■   State.The actual failure cause in a program state is a minimal difference between
          the actual program state and the closest possible state where the failure does
          not occur.
      ■   Code.The actual failure cause in a program code is a minimal difference between
          the actual code and the closest possible code where the failure does not occur.
         All of these failure causes must be veriﬁed by two experiments: one in which
      effect and failure occur and one in which they do not. Once a cause has been
      veriﬁed, valuable information for debugging is available.
      ■   Causes are directly related to the failure.As a failure is an effect of the cause, it
          only occurs when the cause occurs. Neither defects, (Chapter 7) nor anomalies,
          (Chapter 11) are as strongly related to the failure.
      ■   Failure causes suggest ﬁxes. By removing the failure cause, we can make the
          failure disappear. This may not necessarily be a correction, but it is at least a
          good workaround.
        Both properties make causes excellent starting points during debugging,which is
      why in the remainder of this book we will explore how to isolate them automatically.
                                                           12.10 Further Reading           279




12.9 CONCEPTS
Of all circumstances we can observe during debugging,causes are the most valuable.
   A cause is an event preceding another event without which the event in question
(the effect) would not have occurred.
   A cause can be seen as a difference between two worlds—a world in which the
effect occurs and an alternate world in which the effect does not occur.
To show causality, set up an experiment in which the cause does not occur. How To
   Causality is shown if (and only if) the effect does not occur either.
To ﬁnd a cause, use a scientiﬁc method to set up hypotheses on possible causes.
   Verify causality using experiments.
An actual cause is the difference between the actual world and the closest possible
   world in which the effect does not occur.
The principle of picking the closest possible world is also known as Ockham’s
   Razor, which states that whenever you have competing theories for how some
   effect comes to be, pick the simplest.
To ﬁnd an actual cause, narrow down an initial difference via scientiﬁc method.
   A common context between actual worlds excludes causes from the search
space.




12.10 FURTHER READING
The deﬁnitions of cause and effect in this book are based on counterfactuals,because
they rely on assumptions about nonfacts.The ﬁrst counterfactual deﬁnition of causes
and effects is attributed to Hume (1748): “If the ﬁrst object [the cause] had not been,
the second [the effect] never had existed.” The best-known counterfactual theory
of causation was elaborated by Lewis (1973), reﬁned in 1986.
    Causality is a vividly discussed philosophical ﬁeld. In addition to the counterfac-
tual deﬁnitions, the most important alternatives are deﬁnitions based on regularity
and probabilism. I recommend Zalta (2002) for a survey and Pearl (2000) for an
in-depth treatment.
    Ockham’s Razor is the principle proposed by William of Ockham in the 14th
century: “Pluralitas non est ponenda sine neccesitate,” which translates as “plurality
shouldn’t be posited without necessity.” A modern interpretation is: “If two theories
explain the facts equally well,the simpler theory is to be preferred.” Or just: “Keep it
simple.” The principle was stated much earlier byAristotle:“For if the consequences
are the same it is always better to assume the more limited antecedent.”
    According to Bloch (1980), Hanlon’s Razor “Never attribute to malice that
which is adequately explained by stupidity”was coined by the late Robert J. Hanlon
of Scranton, Pensylvania. (This phrase or very similar statements have been
280   CHAPTER 12 Causes and Effects



      attributed to William James, Napoleon Bonaparte, Richard Feynman, Johann
      Wolfgang von Goethe, Robert Heinlein, and others.) Reportedly, Hanlon was a
      winner in a contest to come up with further statements similar to Murphy’s Law:
      “If it can go wrong, it will.”



      EXERCISES
      12.1 Suppose you wish to ﬁnd out whether:
           ■ Elvis died of an overdose of drugs.
           ■ The butterﬂy ballot cost Al Gore the White House.
           ■ Global warming is caused by carbon dioxide.

           Which experiments would you need to support your views?
      12.2 Consider the experiment in Section 6.3 in Chapter 6. In each step:
           (a) What is the hypothesis about the failure cause?
           (b) How does the hypothesis verify causality?
      12.3 Consider the failure of the bigbang program in Example 8.3.
           (a) List three actual failure causes.
           (b) List three failure causes that are not actual causes.
           (c) Where would you correct the program? Why?
      12.4   Be creative. Write a failing program with:
             (a) A failure cause that looks like an error (but is not).
             (b) An error that looks as if it caused the failure (but does not).
      12.5 Site A and site B each send a virus-infected email to site C. A’s email
           arrives ﬁrst, infecting C. Using the counterfactual deﬁnition, what is the
           cause:
           (a) For site C being infected?
           (b) For site C being infected right after A’s email arrives?
           Try to ﬁnd your own answer ﬁrst,and then look at the discussion (and further
           tricky examples) in Zalta (2002).
      12.6 What are the relationships among failing world, passing world, initial differ-
           ence, and cause?
      12.7   Explain the meaning of closest possible world in which a failure does not
             occur. What type of failure causes do we distinguish, and how do we verify
             them? Illustrate using examples.
      12.8   Each of the following statements is either true or false.
             ■ If c is a cause, and e is its effect, then c must precede e.
             ■ If c is a circumstance that causes a failure, it is possible to alter c such that

               the failure no longer occurs.
                                                        12.10 Further Reading          281



      ■ If some cause c is an actual cause, altering c induces the smallest possible
        difference in the effect.
      ■ Every failure cause implies a possible ﬁx.
      ■ For every failure there is exactly one actual cause.
      ■ A failure cause can be determined without executing the program.
      ■ A failure is the difference to the closest possible world in which the cause

        does not occur.
      ■ If I observe two runs (one passing, one failing) with a minimal difference

        in input, I have found an actual failure cause.
      ■ A minimal and successful correction proves that the altered code was the

        actual failure cause.
      ■ Increasing the common context between the possible worlds results in

        smaller causes.
12.9 “Given enough evidence, an anomaly can qualify as a cause.” Discuss.




 When you have eliminated the impossible, whatever remains, however
 improbable, must be the truth.
                                           – SHERLOCK HOLMES, IN A. CONAN DOYLE
                                                       The Sign of Four (1890)
                                                                        CHAPTER


Isolating Failure
Causes                                                         13
This is the chapter that automates most debugging. We show how delta debugging
isolates failure causes automatically—in the program input, in the program’s thread
schedule,and in the program code. In the best case,the reported causes immediately
pinpoint the defect.



13.1 ISOLATING CAUSES AUTOMATICALLY
Narrowing down causes as described in Chapter 12 can be tedious and boring—
when conducted manually, that is. Therefore, we should aim at narrowing down
failure causes automatically.
    In principle, narrowing down a cause can be easily automated. All it takes is
   ■ an automated test that checks whether the failure is still present,
   ■ a means of narrowing down the difference, and
   ■ a strategy for proceeding.


With these ingredients, we can easily automate the scientiﬁc method involved.
We have some automaton apply one difference at a time; after each difference, the
automaton tests whether the failure now occurs. Once it occurs,we have narrowed
down the actual cause.
   Consider the keyboard layout example from Section 12.6 in Chapter 12,in which
a speciﬁc keyboard layout setting caused a presentation shareware to fail. In this
example, automation translates to the following points:
   ■ The automated test starts the presentation shareware and checks for the failure.
   ■ The means of narrowing down the difference is copying settings from one
     account to another.
   ■ The strategy for proceeding could be to copy one setting at a time.


   Proceeding one difference at a time can be very time consuming, though. My
keyboard layout, for instance, has deﬁnitions for 865 key combinations. Do I really
                                                                                        283
284   CHAPTER 13 Isolating Failure Causes



      want to run 865 tests just to learn that I should not have Alt+O deﬁned? What we
      need here is a more effective strategy—and this brings us to our key question:

        HOW DO I ISOLATE FAILURE CAUSES AUTOMATICALLY?




      13.2 ISOLATING VERSUS SIMPLIFYING
      In Chapter 5, we saw how to leverage automated tests to simplify test cases quickly,
      using delta debugging. One could think of applying this approach toward simplifying
      the difference between the real world and the alternate world—that is, to ﬁnd an
      alternate world the difference of which to the real world is as “simple”or as close as
      possible. In practice,this means trying to remove all differences that are not relevant
      for producing the failure—that is, to bring the alternate world as close as possible
      to the real world. In the remaining difference, each aspect is relevant for producing
      the failure—that is, we have an actual cause.
          When we are thinking about narrowing down differences, though, there is a
      more efﬁcient approach than simplifying, called isolating. In simplifying, we get
      a test case where each single circumstance is relevant for producing the failure.
      Isolating, in contrast, produces a pair of test cases—one passing the test, one failing
      the test—with a minimal difference between them that is an actual cause.
          Let’s highlight isolation using an example. In Example 5.5, we saw how the
      ddmin algorithm eventually simpliﬁes a failure-inducing HTML line from 40 char-
      acters down to 8 characters in 48 tests. In the result, a <SELECT> tag, every single
      character is relevant for producing the failure.
          Isolating works in a similar fashion,each time a test case fails,the smaller test case
      is used as the new failing test case. However, we do not just remove circumstances
      from the failing test case but add circumstances to the passing test case, and thus
      may obtain a new (larger) passing test case. Figure 13.1 highlights the difference
      between simpliﬁcation and isolation. Simplifying results in a simpliﬁed failing test
      case, whereas isolation results in a passing and a failing test case with a minimal
      difference.
          Example 13.1 shows how this works on the HTML input of the Mozilla example.
      Starting with the empty passing input (bottom) and the 80-character failing input
      (top), we ﬁrst remove half the characters—as in ddmin. The test passes, and this is
      where isolation shows the difference. We use the half of the input as a new passing
      test case and thus have narrowed down the difference (the cause) to the second
      half of the characters. In the next step, we add half of this half to the passing test
      case, which again passes the test.
          Continuing this pattern, we eventually end up in a minimal difference between
      the original failing input
         <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>
                                                       13.2 Isolating versus Simplifying             285



  Simplifying                                      Isolating




FIGURE 13.1
Simplifying versus isolating. While simplifying, we bring the failing conﬁguration () as close as
possible to the (typically empty) passing conﬁguration (). When isolating, we determine the
smallest difference between the two, moving the passing, as well as the failing, conﬁguration.



EXAMPLE 13.1: Isolating a failure-inducing difference. After six tests, the <
is isolated as failure cause
  Input: <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>40 characters  
         <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7> 0 characters  

       1 <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>20 characters  
       2 <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>30 characters  
       3 <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>35 characters  
       4 <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>37 characters  
       5 <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>38 characters  
       6 <SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>39 characters  

  Result: <


and the new passing input
    SELECT NAME="priority" MULTIPLE SIZE=7>

The difference is in the ﬁrst character: adding a < character changes the SELECT
text to the full HTML <SELECT> tag, causing the failure when being printed. This
example demonstrates the basic difference between simpliﬁcation and isolation.
   ■ Simpliﬁcation means to make each part of the simpliﬁed test case relevant.
     Removing any part makes the failure go away.
   ■ Isolation means to ﬁnd one relevant part of the test case. Removing this

     particular part makes the failure go away.
286   CHAPTER 13 Isolating Failure Causes



          As an allegory, consider the ﬂight test from Section 5.1 in Chapter 5. Simplifying
      a ﬂight test returns the set of circumstances required to make the plane ﬂy (and
      eventually crash). Isolating, in contrast, returns two sets of circumstances that differ
      by a minimum—one set that makes the plane ﬂy (that is,the“passing”outcome) and
      a set that makes the plane crash (the “failing” outcome). The difference is a failure
      cause, and being minimal, it is even an actual failure cause.
           In general,isolation is much more efﬁcient than simpliﬁcation. If we have a large
      failure-inducing input, isolating the difference will pinpoint a failure cause much
      faster than minimizing the test case. In Example 13.1, isolating requires only 5 tests,
      whereas minimizing (Example 5.8) requires 48 tests.
          The greater efﬁciency of isolation comes at a price,though.An isolated difference
      can come in a large context, which may require more effort to understand—
      especially if the isolated cause is not an error. Reconsidering the ﬂight test example,
      assume we isolate that switching on the cabin light causes the crash. If the light stays
      off, the plane lands perfectly. Switching on the cabin light is standard procedure,
      and thus we still have to ﬁnd out how this event interacts with the context such
      that it leads to the crash. With minimization, we simplify the context as a whole. We
      still ﬁnd that the cabin light is relevant for the crash, but we only keep those other
      events that are also relevant (e.g., the short-circuit in the cabin light cable).



      13.3 AN ISOLATION ALGORITHM
      How do we automate isolation? It turns out that the original ddmin algorithm, as
      discussed in Section 5.5 in Chapter 5, can easily be extended to compute a minimal
      difference rather than a minimal test case. In addition to reducing the failing test
      case c whenever a test fails, we now increase the passing test case c whenever a
      test passes. The following is what we have to do to extend ddmin.
      1. Extend-ddmin -such that it works on two sets at a time:
                                                                            
         ■ The passing test case c
                                     that is to be maximized (initially, c ⫽ c ⫽ ∅ holds).
                                                                          
         ■ The failing test case c that is to be minimized (initially, c ⫽ c holds).
                                                                          
         These two sets are the worlds between which we narrow down the difference.
      2. Compute subsets ⌬i as subsets of ⌬ ⫽ c \ c     (instead of subsets of c  ).
                                                                                    
      3. In addition to testing a removal c \ ⌬i , test an addition c  ∪⌬ .
                                                                               i
      4. Introduce new rules for passing and failing test cases:
                                                                                
         ■ Some removal passes: If c \ ⌬i passes for any subset ⌬i , then c \ ⌬i is a larger
                                                                                
           passing test case. Continue reducing the difference between c \ ⌬i and c .
                                                                                       
         ■ Some addition fails: This is the complement to the previous rule. If c ∪ ⌬i fails
                                                                                       
                                      
           for any subset ⌬i , then c ∪ ⌬i is a smaller failing test case. Continue reducing
           the difference between c     and c  ∪ ⌬ .
                                                     i
                                                                               
         ■ Some removal fails: This rule is the same as in ddmin. If c \ ⌬i fails for any
                                                                               
                               
           subset ⌬i , then c \ ⌬i is a smaller failing test case. Continue reducing the
           difference between c   and c  \ ⌬ .
                                                i
                                                                  13.3 An Isolation Algorithm        287



   ■ Some addition passes: Again, this is the complement to the previous rule.
          ∪ ⌬ passes for any subset ⌬ , then c  ∪ ⌬ is a larger passing test case.
     If c    i                       i             i
     Continue reducing the difference between c   ∪ ⌬ and c  .
                                                       i      
   ■ Increase granularity: This rule is as in ddmin, but applies only if all tests

     are unresolved. Increase the granularity and split c into 4 (8, 16, and so on)
     subsets.
   The full algorithm, named dd, is shown in Example 13.2. It builds on the deﬁni-
tions used for ddmin and is called the general delta debugging algorithm. The


EXAMPLE 13.2: The dd algorithm in a nutshell
Let a program’s execution be determined by a set of circumstances called a conﬁguration.
By C, we denote the set of all changes between conﬁgurations.
Let test : 2C → {, , } be a testing function that determines for a conﬁguration c ⊆ C
whether some given failure occurs () or not () or whether the test is unresolved ().
Now, let c and c be conﬁgurations with c ⊆ c ⊆ C such that test (c ) ⫽  ∧ test (c ) ⫽
. c is the “passing” conﬁguration (typically, c ⫽ ∅ holds) and c is the “failing”
conﬁguration.
The general delta debugging algorithm dd (c , c ) isolates the failure-inducing difference
between c and c . It returns a pair (c    , c  ) ⫽ dd(c , c ) such that c ⊆ c  ⊆ c  ⊆ c ,
                                                                                          
        ) ⫽ , and test (c  ) ⫽  hold and c  \ c  is a relevant difference—that is, no single
test (c                                          
circumstance of c can be removed from c to make the failure disappear or added to c        

to make the failure occur.
The dd algorithm is deﬁned as dd (c , c ) ⫽ dd  (c , c , 2) with
  dd  (c
         
            , c , n)
        ⎧  
        ⎪  (c , c )                               if |⌬| ⫽ 1
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪  dd  (c \ ⌬i , c , 2)                if ∃i ∈ {1..n} ⫻ test (c \ ⌬i ) ⫽ 
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪                                           (“some removal passes”)
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪            , c  ∪ ⌬ , 2)                                         ∪⌬ )⫽
        ⎪
        ⎪  dd  (c            i                   if ∃i ∈ {1..n} ⫻ test (c   i
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎨                                           (“some addition fails”)
    ⫽ dd  c  ∪ ⌬ , c  , max(n ⫺ 1, 2)                                        ∪⌬ )⫽
                                                    else if ∃i ∈ {1..n} ⫻ test (c
        ⎪
        ⎪                  i                                                       i
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪                                           (“some addition passes”)
        ⎪
        ⎪                                    
        ⎪
        ⎪  dd  c    , c \ ⌬i , max(n ⫺ 1, 2)     else if ∃i ∈ {1..n} ⫻ test (c \ ⌬i ) ⫽ 
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪
        ⎪                                           (“some removal fails”)
        ⎪
        ⎪         
                        
                                         
        ⎪
        ⎩dd c , c , min(2n, |⌬|)
        ⎪                                           else if n ⬍ |⌬| (“increase granularity”)
           (c , c )                               otherwise
where ⌬ ⫽ c \ c
                  ⫽ ⌬ ∪ ⌬ ∪ · · · ∪ ⌬ with all ⌬ pairwise disjoint, and ᭙⌬ ⫻ |⌬ | ≈ (|⌬|/n)
                      1    2          n           i                             i i
holds.
                                            ) ⫽  ∧ test (c  ) ⫽  ∧ n ⭐ |⌬|.
The recursion invariant for dd  is test (c                
288   CHAPTER 13 Isolating Failure Causes



      dd algorithm returns a pair of conﬁgurations c , c  that both lie between the

      original c and c and the difference of which ⌬ ⫽ c \ c
                                                                 is 1-minimal—that is,

      each difference in ⌬ is relevant for producing the failure (see Proposition A.17
      in the Appendix). Although in practice ⌬ frequently contains only one difference,
      ⌬ may contain multiple differences, which must all be applied to c     in order to

      produce c .

           Regarding complexity,dd has the same worst-case complexity as ddmin. If nearly
      all test cases result in an unresolved outcome, the number of tests can be quadratic
      with respect to |c \ c |. The more test cases that pass or fail, though, the more
      efﬁcient dd becomes, up to logarithmic complexity when all tests have a resolved
      outcome (see Proposition A.19 in the Appendix). When using dd, it is thus wise to
      keep unresolved test outcomes to a minimum, as this keeps down the number of
      tests required.
          The dd algorithm can be seen as an automation of scientiﬁc method. It deﬁnes
      hypotheses (conﬁgurations),tests them,and reﬁnes or rejects the hypothesis accord-
      ing to the test outcome. One might argue that humans may be far more creative than
      this simple strategy. However, automating the process makes it less error prone and
      more systematic than most humans proceed—and it is exactly the type of boring
      task computers are supposed to relieve us from.


      13.4 IMPLEMENTING ISOLATION
      Example 13.3 shows a PYTHON implementation of dd. Just as with the PYTHON
      implementation of ddmin (Example 5.4), tail recursion and quantiﬁers have been
      turned into loops. Again, we rely on a split() function as well as set operations on
      lists such as listunion() (Example 13.4) and listminus(). (An implementation
      for listunion() is shown in Example 5.7.) Of course, we also need a test()
      function that returns either PASS, FAIL, or UNRESOLVED (e.g., a test() function as
      in Example 5.8 for MOZILLA). Extending the abstract form shown in Example 13.2,
      the concrete implementation has some ﬁne points that reduce the number of tests:
      ■   The order in which the test cases are checked is optimized. In particu-
          lar, the ﬁrst two cases require testing of test(next_c_fail) but not of
          test(next_c_pass). This ensures a minimum number of tests, especially in
          cases where few tests are unresolved.
      ■   We ﬁrst check those situations that reduce the difference the most, such as
          cases 1–3.
      ■   In principle, case 1 is not necessary, as it is subsumed by case 4. If success-
          ful, though, it avoids invoking test(next_c_pass). Together, cases 1 and 2
          turn dd() into a binary search if all tests return PASS or FAIL (rather than
          UNRESOLVED).
      ■   The implementation assumes caching of earlier test results (see Section 5.8.1
          in Chapter 5). If the test() function does not cache, you must rewrite the
                                                  13.4 Implementing Isolation        289



    code shown in Example 13.3 such that it saves and reuses the results of
    test(next_c_pass) and test(next_c_fail).

■   The offset variable records the subset to check next. When some difference
    becomes irrelevant (cases 4 and 5),we continue checking the next subset rather
    than restarting with the ﬁrst subset. This makes sure each delta has the same
    chance to be removed.


EXAMPLE 13.3: A PYTHON implementation of the dd algorithm
def dd(c_pass, c_fail, test):
    """Return a pair (C_PASS’, C_FAIL’) such that
       * C_PASS subseteq C_PASS’ subset C_FAIL’ subseteq C_FAIL holds
       * C_FAIL’ - C_PASS’ is a minimal difference relevant for TEST."""
    n = 2     # Initial granularity

    while 1:
        assert test(c_pass) == PASS
        assert test(c_fail) == FAIL

         delta = listminus(c_fail, c_pass)
         if n > len(delta):
             return (c_pass, c_fail) # No further minimizing

         deltas = split(delta, n); assert len(deltas) == n

         offset = 0
         j = 0
         while j < n:
             i = (j + offset) % n
             next_c_pass = listunion(c_pass, deltas[i])
             next_c_fail = listminus(c_fail, deltas[i])

             if test(next_c_fail) == FAIL and n == 2:     # (1)
                 c_fail = next_c_fail
                 n = 2; offset = 0; break
             elif test(next_c_fail) == PASS:              # (2)
                 c_pass = next_c_fail
                 n = 2; offset = 0; break
             elif test(next_c_pass) == FAIL:              # (3)
                 c_fail = next_c_pass
                 n = 2; offset = 0; break
             elif test(next_c_fail) == FAIL:              # (4)
                 c_fail = next_c_fail
                 n = max(n -- 1, 2); offset = i; break
             elif test(next_c_pass) == PASS:              # (5)
                 c_pass = next_c_pass
                 n = max(n -- 1, 2); offset = i; break
             else:
                 j = j + 1                      # Try next subset

         if j >= n:                            # All tests unresolved
             if n >= len(delta):
                 return (c_pass, c_fail)
             else:
                 n = min(n * 2, len(delta))     # Increase granularity
290   CHAPTER 13 Isolating Failure Causes




      EXAMPLE 13.4: A PYTHON implementation of the listunion() function
      def listunion(c1, c2):
          """Return the union of C1 and C2.
             Assumes elements of C1 are hashable."""

           # The hash map S1 has an entry for each element in C1
           s1 = {}
           for delta in c1:
               s1[delta] = 1

           # Add all elements in C2 that are not in C1
           c = c1[:]    # Copy C1
           for delta in c2:
               if not s1.has_key(delta):
                   c.append(delta)

           return c



      ■   Ordering of cases 3 and 4 is tricky. Case 4 simpliﬁes the failing conﬁguration and
          can rely on the result of a test already performed. Case 3 requires another test,
          but quickly reduces the difference if successful. Because we want to minimize
          the difference as quickly as possible, case 3 comes ﬁrst.
          Just like the PYTHON code for ddmin (List 5.2), this code should be easy to
      port to other languages. All you need is an appropriate representation for sets of
      circumstances such as c_pass or c_fail.



      13.5 ISOLATING FAILURE-INDUCING INPUT
      Let’s now put dd to practice, applying it on a number of failure-inducing circum-
      stances. We have already seen how dd pinpoints the < character in the HTML input
      (Example 13.1) and how this requires much fewer tests than simplifying the entire
      input (Example 5.5).
          Applying dd on the fuzz inputs (discussed in Section 5.7 in Chapter 5) yields
      even more substantial savings. As reported in Zeller and Hildebrandt (2002), only
      12–50 tests were required to narrow down the failure-inducing difference to a single
      character. This conﬁrms the prediction of Proposition A.19 predicting a logarith-
      mic number of tests when all tests have a resolved outcome. In case of the FLEX
      tests, where ddmin requires 11,000–17,960 test runs to simplify the input, the dd
      algorithm requires but 23–51 runs.
          In cases where there were unresolved outcomes,as well as larger failure-inducing
      differences, the number of tests performed by dd was larger. In one of the NROFF
      test cases,473 test runs (out of which 390 were unresolved) were needed to isolate a
                                     13.6 Isolating Failure-inducing Schedules           291



17-character failure-inducing difference. However, this is still a much lower number
than the 5,565 test runs required for simpliﬁcation of the same input.




13.6 ISOLATING FAILURE-INDUCING SCHEDULES
Again, we can apply isolation on all circumstances that inﬂuence the program
execution—provided we have a means of controlling and reproducing them. As
discussed in Section 4.3.7 in Chapter 4, schedules of process and threads can result
in failures that are difﬁcult to debug.With a means of recording and replaying sched-
ules, and a means of isolating failure-inducing differences, such defects become far
easier to track down. The basic idea uses four building blocks:
Deterministic replay. Use a tool that captures the execution of nondeterministic
   JAVA applications and allows the programmer to replay these executions
   deterministically—that is,input and thread schedules are reconstructed from the
   recorded execution. This effectively solves the problem of reproducing failures
   deterministically.
Test case generation. A replay tool allows the application to be executed under a
   given thread schedule. Use the tool to generate alternate schedules. For instance,
   one can alter an original passing (or failing) schedule until an alternate failing
   (passing) schedule is found.
Isolating failure causes. Use dd to automatically isolate the failure cause in a
   failure-inducing thread schedule. The basic idea is to systematically narrow the
   difference between the passing and the failing thread schedule until only a min-
   imal difference remains—a difference such as “The failure occurs if and only if
   thread switch #3291 occurs at clock time 47,539.” This effectively solves the
   isolation problem.
Relating causes to errors. Each of the resulting thread differences occurs at a spe-
   ciﬁc location of the program—for instance, thread switch #3291 may occur at
   line 20 of foo.java—giving a good starting point for locating thread interferences.
    Choi and Zeller (2002) implemented this idea using IBM’s DEJAVU tool to record
and replay thread schedules on a single-processor machine. As a proof of concept,
they applied the approach on a multithreaded ray-tracing program from the SPEC
JVM98 JAVA test suite, in which they had reintroduced a data race that had been
commented out by the original authors. This defect, shown in Example 13.5, lead
to a failure the ﬁrst time it was executed.
   1. Thread A enters the LoadScene() method and saves the value of
      ScenesLoaded in OldScenesLoaded (line 84).
   2. In line 85,a thread switch occurs,causing the transfer of control from thread A
      to another thread B.
292   CHAPTER 13 Isolating Failure Causes




      EXAMPLE 13.5: Introducing a race condition
       25 public class Scene { …
       44     private static int ScenesLoaded = 0;
       45     (more methods …)
       81     private
       82     int LoadScene(String filename) {
       84          int OldScenesLoaded = ScenesLoaded;
       85          (more initializations …)
       91          infile = new DataInputStream(…);
       92          (more code …)
      130          ScenesLoaded = OldScenesLoaded + 1;
      131          System.out.println("" +
                        ScenesLoaded + " scenes loaded.");
      132        …
      134     }
      135     …
      733 }

      Source: Choi and Zeller (2002). ScenesLoaded may not be properly updated if a thread switch occurs
      during execution of lines 85–130.


         3. Thread B runs the entire LoadScene() method and properly increments the
            ScenesLoaded variable.
         4. As thread A resumes execution,it assigns the value of OldScenesLoaded plus
            one to ScenesLoaded (line 130). This effectively undoes the update made by
            thread B.
            Using a fuzz approach (see Section 5.7 in Chapter 5), Choi and Zeller generated
      random schedules, starting from the failing one. Each schedule consisted of long
      lists of yield points—places in the program code such as function calls or backward
      branches where a thread switch occurred. After 66 tests, they had generated an
      alternate schedule where the failure would not occur.
            Comparing the original (failing) schedule and the alternate (passing) schedule
      resulted in 3,842,577,240 differences, each moving a thread switch by one yield
      point. Applying all differences to the passing schedule changed its yield points to
      those in the failing schedule, thus making the program fail. However, only a few of
      these 3.8 billion schedule differences were relevant for the failure, which could be
      uncovered by delta debugging.
           The delta debugging run is summarized in Figure 13.2.The upper line is the size of
      the failing conﬁguration c ,and the lower line is the size of the passing conﬁguration
      c . As the tests only return  or , dd requires a logarithmic number of tests such

      that after 50 tests only one difference remains. The failure occurs if and only if
      thread switch #33 occurs at yield point 59,772,127 (instead of 59,772,126)—that
      is, at line 91 of Scene.java.
                                            13.7 Isolating Failure-inducing Changes              293



              1e+14

                                                                               cpass
                                                                                cfail




              1e+13



     Deltas


              1e+12




              1e+11
                      0   5   10     15     20      25     30      35     40       45    50
                                             Tests executed

FIGURE 13.2
Narrowing down a failure-inducing thread switch. After 50 tests, one out of 3.8 billion thread
switches is isolated as an actual failure cause.


    Line 91 of Scene.java is the ﬁrst method invocation (and thus yield point)
after the initialization of OldScenesLoaded. Likewise, the alternative yield point
59,772,126 (with a successful test outcome) is the invocation of LoadScene at
line 82 of Scene.java—just before the variable OldScenesLoaded is initialized. Thus,
by narrowing down the failure-inducing schedule difference to one single difference
the approach had successfully rediscovered the location where Choi and Zeller had
originally introduced the error.
    As this example was artiﬁcially generated, it does not necessarily generalize to
all types of parallel programs. However, it illustrates that once we have a means
of automated deterministic testing (as with the DEJAVU tool) adding automated
isolation of failure-inducing circumstances is easy. In other words, once one has
automated testing, automated isolation of failure causes is a minor step.




13.7 ISOLATING FAILURE-INDUCING CHANGES
Failure-inducing inputs and thread schedules do not directly cause a failure. Instead,
they cause different executions of the program, which in turn cause the failure. An
interesting aspect of thread switches is that they can be directly associated with
294   CHAPTER 13 Isolating Failure Causes



      code—the code executed at the moment the thread switch occurs (and is thus a
      failure cause). Consequently, the programmer can immediately focus on this part of
      the program code.
          This is close to what we’d actually want: some machine where we can simply
      shove in our program and it will tell us “This line is wrong; please ﬁx it” (or better
      yet, ﬁx it for us such that we do not have to do any work at all anymore).
          As surprising as it seems, such an approach exists, and it is based on delta debug-
      ging. It works as follows. Rather than having two different inputs for the same
      program, we have one input for two versions of the program—one version where
      the test passes, and one version where it fails. The goal of delta debugging is now to
      isolate the failure-inducing difference between the two versions—the change that
      turns a failing version into a passing version.
          At this point, you may ask “Where should I get the passing version from? Is not
      this the whole point of debugging?”And you are right. However, there are situations
      in which some “old” version of a program passed a test that a “new” version fails.
      This situation is called a regression. The new version falls behind the capabilities of
      the old version.
          The following is an example of a regression. From 1997 to 2001,I was maintaining
      the DDD debugger discussed in Section 8.6 in Chapter 8. DDD is a front end to
      the GDB command-line debugger, sending commands to GDB and interpreting its
      replies. In 1998, I got an email from a user who had upgraded his GDB version and
      suddenly DDD no longer worked properly.
          Date: Fri, 31 Jul 1998 15:11:05 -0500
          From: Name withheld
          To: DDD Bug Reports <bug-ddd@gnu.org>
          Subject: Problem with DDD and GDB 4.17

          When using DDD with GDB 4.16, the run command correctly
          uses any prior command-line arguments, or the value of
          "set args". However, when I switched to GDB 4.17, this
          no longer worked: If I entered a run command in the
          console window, the prior command-line options would be
          lost. [...]

          This regression situation is all too common when upgrading your system.
      You upgrade one part and suddenly other parts that depended on the “old”
      behavior no longer work. I wondered whether there was a way of isolating the
      cause automatically—that is, of isolating the change to GDB that caused DDD’s
      failure.
          If a regression occurs, a common debugging strategy is to focus on the changes
      one made. In our case,the change was a move from GDB 4.16 to GDB 4.17,and thus
      this part was clear. However, this change in the GDB release translates into several
      changes to the GDB source code. Running the diff utility to highlight those changes
      revealed an output of 178,200 lines.
                                        13.7 Isolating Failure-inducing Changes           295



   $ diff -r gdb-4.16 gdb-4.17
   diff -r gdb-4.16/COPYING gdb-4.17/COPYING
   5c5
   <                           675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
   ⫺⫺⫺
   >                        59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA
   282c282
   <       Appendix: How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs
   ⫺⫺⫺
   >               How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs
   .
   .
   .
   178,192 more lines

   These 178,200 lines translate into 8,721 individual changes separated by
unchanged lines—that is, there were 8,721 locations in the GDB source code that
had been changed. At least one of these 8,721 changes caused the regression—but
which one?
   Again, this is a setting in which delta debugging can isolate the failure cause. The
idea is to treat these changes as input to a patch-and-test program that works in
three steps.
1. Apply changes. We must apply the changes to the GDB code base. This is done
   by taking the original-GDB -4.16 code base and then running the UNIX PATCH
   program to apply a subset of the changes. Note that PATCH may fail to apply the
   changes—for instance, if individual changes depend on each other. In this case,
   the test outcome is unresolved ( ).
2. Reconstruct GDB. We must reconstruct GDB after all changes have been applied.
   Normally, this would be a simple matter of invoking the UNIX MAKE program.
   However,as the MAKE speciﬁcation itself may have changed we need to recreate
   the Makeﬁle ﬁrst.
      If we apply a huge set of unrelated changes, we are quite likely to get a
   compilation error. The patch-and-test program must detect this and return an
   unresolved test outcome.
3. Run the test. If we have been successful in recreating GDB, we run it (with
   DDD) to see whether the failure occurs or not. Because applying arbitrary subsets
   of changes can result in surprising behavior of the program, it is wise to limit
   unwanted effects. In the case of GDB, we created a temporary directory for each
   run, ensuring that personal ﬁles would not be touched or overwritten.
   Having translated the changes to input, we can now apply delta debugging to
minimize the set of changes or to isolate the failure-inducing change (the failure-
inducing input).The patch-and-test program,instrumented by ddmin or dd, would
apply a subset of the changes,see whether GDB can be reconstructed,and if so return
 or  depending on the test outcome. If GDB cannot be reconstructed with the
changes applied (which is quite common for random subsets), the patch-and-test
296   CHAPTER 13 Isolating Failure Causes



      program would return , and delta debugging would try the next alternative. If we
      actually do this, and run delta debugging, we end up in a single change that makes
      DDD fail.
         diff -r gdb-4.16/gdb/infcmd.c gdb-4.17/gdb/infcmd.c
         1239c1278
         < "Set arguments to give program being debugged when it is started.\n\
         ⫺⫺⫺
         > "Set argument list to give program being debugged when it is started.\n\

         This change in a string constant from arguments to argument list was respon-
      sible for GDB 4.17 not interoperating with DDD. Although the string constant is
      actually part of GDB’s online help, it is also the basis for GDB’s output. Given the
      command show args, GDB 4.16 replies
         Arguments to give program being debugged when it is started is "a b c"

      but GDB 4.17 issues a slightly different (and grammatically correct) text:
         Argument list to give program being debugged when it is started is "a b c"

          Unfortunately, this output could not be parsed by DDD, which expected a reply
      starting with “Arguments.”To solve the problem here and now, one could simply
      have reversed the GDB change. Eventually, I upgraded DDD to make it work with
      the new-GDB-version.
         This approach of determining the culprit for a regression has been named the
      blame-o-meter—as a means to know who to blame. However, as the GDB example
      shows,a cause for a problem need not be a defect,it may not even be a mistake.What
      the GDB programmers did was perfectly sensible. DDD’s defect,if any,was to rely on
      a speciﬁc output format. Nonetheless, once one has an automated regression test it
      may prove useful to add a blame-o-meter on top. This way, whenever a regression
      test fails one could start the blame-o-meter and tell the developer not only that a
      test fails but also why it fails.
          Building a blame-o-meter is not very difﬁcult, provided one has automated con-
      struction, automated regression tests, and a means of applying changes (such as
      the UNIX PATCH program). A number of issues call for speciﬁc optimizations,
      though.
      History. If the changes come from a version archive, they can be grouped accord-
         ing to their creation time. Ensuring that later changes always occur with
         earlier changes will speed up delta debugging enormously, as this ensures
         consistent reconstruction and thus resolved test outcomes. In addition, as we
         know from Proposition A.19 in the Appendix, resolved tests outcomes result
         in a logarithmic number of tests—basically a binary search along the change
         history.
      Reconstruction. As each test requires reconstruction of the program, it is useful to
         have a means of incremental reconstruction. The MAKE program compiles only
                                               13.7 Isolating Failure-inducing Changes         297



   the code the sources of which have changed since the last construction. The
   CCACHE program speeds up recompilation by caching previous compiles and
   detecting when the same compile is being done again.
Grouping. Many subsets of changes result in unresolved outcomes because the
   program cannot be reconstructed. For instance, a change A that references a
   variable may require a change B that declares that variable. Every subset that
   contains only A but not B will result in an unresolved outcome, slowing down
   delta debugging considerably. Therefore, in addition to grouping changes by cre-
   ation time, it is also useful to group them according to scope—that is, to keep
   those changes together that apply to the same ﬁle, class, or function.
Failure resolution. A simple means of dealing with construction errors is to search
   for changes that may ﬁx these errors. After a failing construction, one could scan
   the error messages for identiﬁers,add all changes that reference these identiﬁers,
   and try again. This is repeated until construction is possible, or until there are no
   more changes to add.
    In the case of the 8,721 changes to the GDB source code, these optimizations
all proved beneﬁcial. CCACHE reduced the average reconstruction time to 20 per-
cent. Grouping by scope reduced the number of tests by 50 percent. Overall,
as Figure 13.3 shows, using dd with scope information required about 97 tests.
Assuming that each test takes about two minutes, this boils down to three hours
until delta debugging has isolated the cause in the GDB code.
    Three hours still sounds like a lot. I am pretty conﬁdent that you as a programmer
would have found the cause in the GDB code in less than three hours (especially
having read this book). However, it is rather uncommon to have 8,721 changes
without any temporal ordering and intermediate regression tests, such that typical
regressions can be dealt with much faster.

                    100,000
                     10,000


     Changes left
                      1000
                       100
                        10
                         1
                              0     50   100          150        200       250         300
                                                Tests executed
    GDB with ddmin algorithm
            ... with dd algorithm
     ... plus scope information

FIGURE 13.3
Isolating failure-inducing code changes. After 97 tests, delta debugging has isolated one of
8,721 code changes as causing the failure.
298   CHAPTER 13 Isolating Failure Causes




      FIGURE 13.4
      Isolating failure-inducing code changes in ECLIPSE. As soon as a test fails, the delta debugging
      plug-in automatically determines the failure-inducing code change—if there were an earlier
      version where the test did not fail.



          If you want to experiment with delta debugging, Figure 13.4 shows a plug-
      in named DDCHANGE for the ECLIPSE programming environment. DDCHANGE
      keeps track of all tests and all test outcomes. As soon as a test fails that had passed
      in some previous version, the delta debugging plug-in automatically determines the
      failure-inducing code change in the background and presents its diagnosis as soon
      as it is available. This plug-in makes use of the facilities for automated construction,
      automated testing, and version control, as they are integrated within ECLIPSE (thus,
      no complex setup is necessary).
          DDCHANGE is not that quick,either. As it has to reconstruct the program several
      times, it can take some time to isolate the failure-inducing change—and again, an
      experienced programmer might ﬁnd the cause quicker. However, unless you need
      the cause in the next hour you can easily have delta debugging determine the cause
      for you. It is slow and dumb, but it will come up with a result—and no programmer
      I know of has fun running these experiments manually.
                                                  13.8 Problems and Limitations           299




13.8 PROBLEMS AND LIMITATIONS
Although delta debugging is generally good at isolating causes, one should be aware
of its limits as well as common issues. These include the following

How do we choose the alternate world?
As laid out in Section 12.7 in Chapter 12, choosing the alternate world (i.e., input or
version) determines the initial difference in which to search for causes. If we want
to search for causes in the input, we should use a passing run with a different input.
If we want to search for causes in the conﬁguration, we should search a passing run
with an alternate conﬁguration. In general, we should choose an alternate world
that is as close as possible to the actual world, in order to keep the initial search
space as small as possible.

How do we decompose conﬁgurations?
Many conﬁgurations naturally decompose into smaller parts that can be individually
assessed. A text decomposes into lines, an HTML page decomposes into head and
body sections, a schedule decomposes into thread switches, and a code difference
decomposes into locations. However, there are some conﬁgurations for which it is
difﬁcult to provide such a decomposition.
   As an example, consider image processing—wherein an application fails when
processing one speciﬁc image but passes on all others. What is the difference
between the failure-inducing image and the passing ones? In such cases, it helps
to understand how the application works. Does it process the image row by row?
In such cases, decomposing the image by rows may make sense. Does it rely on
properties such as number of colors, brightness, or contrast? In this case, it may
make sense to reduce the difference in terms of these properties—for instance, to
have each delta adjust the contrast until the difference becomes minimal.

When do we know a failure is the failure?
When a program is fed with arbitrary input,it may fail in a number of ways. However,
the changed input may cause a different failure than the original test case—that is,
the program may fail at a different location, produce an alternate error message, or
otherwise produce a behavior that is considered“failing”but differs from the original
behavior. We call such different failures artifacts, which are artiﬁcially generated
during the delta debugging process.
     In the fuzz examples from Section 5.7 in Chapter 5,for instance,our test function
would return  whenever a program crashed—regardless of further circumstances.
In the fuzz case, ignoring artifacts may be legitimate, as a program must not crash
under any input. In general, though, we may want to check further aspects of the
failing behavior.
     One of the most important aspects about a failure is to know the location that
was active at the moment of the failure—that is, the exact statement that issued
the failing message, or the last executed statement in case of a crash. Checking
300   CHAPTER 13 Isolating Failure Causes



      this location is a good protection against artifacts. An even better protection is to
      take into account the backtrace, the stack of calling functions (see Section 8.3.1 in
      Chapter 8) at the time of the failure.
         ■ The test function returns  only if the program failed and if the backtrace of
           the failure was identical to the original backtrace.
         ■ If the program failed, but with a different backtrace, test would return 
                                                                                    .
         ■ If the program passed the test, test would return .


          In addition to the backtrace, further aspects such as coverage, timing, or exact
      output can be used to check against artifacts. However, the larger the number of
      aspects to be considered part of a failure, the larger the cause required to create all
      of these aspects.

      How do we disambiguate between multiple causes?
      For the sake of efﬁciency,delta debugging always takes the ﬁrst possibility to narrow
      down a difference. However, there may be other possibilities, resulting in alternate
      actual causes. In the MOZILLA example, for instance, dd returned < as a failure-
      inducing difference,but removing any of the <SELECT> characters would have made
      the failure disappear.
          It is fairly easy to extend dd such that it considers other alternatives. This is a
      trade-off between performance and convenience. In my experience, the ﬁrst cause
      is typically sufﬁcient to characterize the failure. If it were not, I would run dd on the
      other alternatives. Others may prefer to have dd compute multiple alternatives in
      advance, such that they can consider them all.

      How do I get to the defect?
      Every failure-inducing difference returned by delta debugging is an actual cause. As
      such, it suggests a ﬁx: simply remove the cause and the failure will no longer occur.
      For instance, we could remove the < from the MOZILLA input, prohibit thread
      switches during the Raytracer data race, or revert the GDB code to the previous
      version. This illustrates that such ﬁxes are more workarounds than corrections—
      simply because they do not increase correctness of the program.
          In general,though,the cause delta debugging isolates is seldom an error—simply
      because the alternate world need not be correct,either. In fact,if an error is the same
      in both worlds it will not even be part of the difference in which delta debugging
      searches for an actual cause.
          To turn the cause into a correction, we still have to ﬁnd out where to correct
      the program (which is, in fact, deciding where and what the defect is). We would
      have to search the code that handles printing of <SELECT> tags in MOZILLA, set up
      the Raytracer such that the data race no longer occurs, and adapt DDD such that it
      handles the outputs from different GDB versions.
          In all three cases, the correction is induced by the cause, and the cause certainly
      helps in designing and motivating the correction.To get to the actual defect,though,
      again requires us to examine the innards of the program,as explored in the remainder
      of this book.
                                                         13.11 Further Reading         301




13.9 CONCEPTS
To isolate failure causes automatically, you need
    ■ an automated test that checks whether the failure is still present,
    ■ a means of narrowing down the difference, and
    ■ a strategy for proceeding.

One possible strategy is the general delta debugging algorithm dd (Example 13.2).
     dd determines the relevant difference between two conﬁgurations (inputs,
schedules, code changes, or other circumstances) with respect to a given test—that
is, an actual cause for the failure.
To isolate a failure cause in the input, apply dd (or another strategy) on two How To
   program inputs—one that passes and one that fails the test.
To isolate a failure cause in the thread schedule, apply dd (or another strategy)
   on two schedules—one that passes and one that fails the test. You need a means
   of replaying and manipulating schedules, such as DEJAVU.
To isolate a failure-inducing code change, apply dd (or another strategy) on
   two program versions—one that passes and one that fails the test. You need
   automated reconstruction of the program after a set of changes has been applied.
      Any actual cause, as returned by delta debugging, can be altered to make the
   failure no longer occur. This does not mean, though, that the cause is a defect. It
   also does not mean that there may be only one actual cause.
Delta debugging on states is a fairly recent technique and not yet fully evaluated.


13.10 TOOLS
 Delta Debugging Plug-ins for ECLIPSE. At the time of writing,a number of delta
  debugging tools were made available for the ECLIPSE programming framework.
  They can be downloaded at http://www.st.cs.uni-saarland.de/eclipse/ .
 CCACHE. To apply delta debugging on program changes, you may ﬁnd
  the CCACHE tool for incremental compilation useful. It is available at
  http://ccache.samba.org/ .


13.11 FURTHER READING
Delta debugging on program inputs is described in Zeller and Hildebrandt (2002),
a paper discussed in Chapter 5. The paper cites all data from all experiments. The
deﬁnitions are general enough to pertain to all types of changes and conﬁgurations.
   Delta debugging on thread schedules was developed by Choi and Zeller (2002)
while the authors were visiting IBM research. This paper contains all details on the
approach and the experiment. The DEJAVU tool by Choi and Srinivasan (1998) is
described in Chapter 4.
302   CHAPTER 13 Isolating Failure Causes



           Zeller (1999) describes how to apply delta debugging to code changes. This was
      the ﬁrst application of delta debugging. The algorithms used in this paper are now
      superseded by the more advanced versions in this book, but the case studies are
      still valid.
           Failure-inducing code changes were ﬁrst handled by Ness and Ngo (1997). In
      their setting,a compiler consisted of a number of optimization modules. By reverting
      module after module to an earlier (passing) state, they succeeded in identifying the
      module the changes of which caused the failure and therefore kept it at its earlier
      revision.




      EXERCISES
      13.1 Repeat the exercises of Chapter 5 “Simplifying Problems” using isolation
           instead of minimization.
      13.2 Implement simpliﬁcation of test cases using an unchanged dd implementa-
           tion,but with a wrapper around the test function.Which wrapper is needed?
      13.3 Rather than simplifying the failing conﬁguration (as in ddmin ), one can
           also think about maximizing the passing conﬁguration—that is, having the
           largest possible conﬁguration that still passes (with a minimal difference to
           the failing conﬁguration).
           (a) When would such a ddmax algorithm be useful?
           (b) Give a mathematical description of ddmax (analogously to ddmin in
                List 5.2).
           (c) Implement ddmax.
      13.4   Each statement about causes and effects is either true or false. Give a short
             reason for your answer if appropriate.
             ■ If C is a cause and E is its effect, C must precede E. T/F

             ■ If C is a circumstance that causes a failure, it is possible to alter C such that

               the failure no longer occurs. T/F
             ■ If some cause C is an actual cause, altering C induces the smallest possible

               difference in the effect. T/F
             ■ Every failure cause implies a possible ﬁx. T/F

             ■ For every failure, there is exactly one actual cause. T/F

             ■ A failure cause can be determined without executing a program. T/F

             ■ If I observe two runs (one passing, one failing) with a minimal difference

               in input, I have found an actual failure cause. T/F
             ■ A successful ﬁx proves that the altered code was the actual failure cause.T/F
                                                           13.11 Further Reading     303



13.5 In delta debugging, you can either use simpliﬁcation to simplify failure-
     inducing input or isolation to isolate a minimal failure-inducing difference.
     (a) Compare these two approaches with respect to their advantages and
         disadvantages.
     (b) Compare the running times of the respective algorithms in their worst-
         case and best-case behavior.
     (c) Which are the properties of a 1-minimal result of isolation?
13.6   Using the logbook format (Section 6.5 in Chapter 6), describe the ﬁrst four
       steps of the delta debugging run in Example 13.1. Which are the hypotheses,
       predictions, and experiments?
13.7   Is delta debugging an instance of scientiﬁc method? Discuss.
13.8 Which are the prerequisites in order to apply delta debugging? Discuss
     situations in which delta debugging is not helpful.




 Debugging is still, as it was 30 years ago, a matter of trial and error.
                                                               – HENRY LIEBERMAN
                                                    The Debugging Scandal (1997)
                                                                          CHAPTER


Isolating Cause–Effect
Chains
                                                                  14
This chapter presents a way of narrowing down failure causes even further. By
extracting and comparing program states, delta debugging automatically isolates
the variables and values that cause the failure, resulting in a cause–effect chain
of the failure: “variable x was 42; therefore p became null; and thus the program
failed.”



14.1 USELESS CAUSES
In Chapter 13, we saw how to isolate inputs, code changes, or schedules that cause
a given failure. In many cases, such causes directly lead to the defect in question.
There are cases,though,where a difference in the input,for instance,gives few clues,
if any, to the nature of the error. This is particularly true if program processes input
at several places, such that it is difﬁcult to relate a difference to some speciﬁc code.
    One typical example of such programs is a compiler. A compiler processes the
original source code through several stages until it produces an executable.
   1. For C, C++, and other languages, the source code is ﬁrst passed through a
      preprocessor.
   2. The compiler proper parses the source code into a syntax tree.
   3. By traversing the syntax tree, the compiler emits assembler code.
   4. The assembler translates the code into object code.
   5. The linker binds the objects into an executable.
    In addition, each step can include a number of optimizations. The compiler, for
instance, optimizes expressions found in the syntax tree, as well as the generated
assembler code.
   As an example, consider the fail.c program shown in Example 14.1. It is
interesting only in one aspect: compiling fail.c with the GNU compiler (GCC)
version 2.95.2 on Linux with optimization enabled causes the compiler to crash. In
fact, depending on the version of Linux you are using it does not just crash but allo-
cates all memory on the machine, causing other processes to die from starvation.
When I tried this example ﬁrst, every single process on my machine died, until
only the Linux kernel and GCC remained—and only then did the kernel ﬁnally kill            305
306   CHAPTER 14 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains




      EXAMPLE 14.1: The fail.c program that makes the GNU compiler crash
      double mult(double z[], int n) {
        int i, j;

           i = 0;
           for (j = 0; j < n; j++) {
             i = i + j + 1;
             z[i] = z[i] * (z[0] + 1.0);
           }

           return z[n];
      }



      the GCC process. (Actually, this happened while I was remotely logged in on the
      workstation of our system administrator,effectively terminating his session. I cannot
      recommend repeating the experience.)
         The fail.c program in Example 14.1 is an input (to GCC), and thus we can
      isolate the actual cause—using delta debugging, for instance. Thus, we may ﬁnd
      that if we change the line
           z[i] = z[i] * (z[0] + 1.0);
      to
           z[i] = z[i] * (z[0]);

      the program compiles just ﬁne. Thus, we now know that the piece of code + 1.0
      in fail.c causes the failure.
          With this knowledge, we may now be able to work around the problem. If the
      mult() function in fail.c were part of our program, we could rearrange its code
      such that its semantics remained unchanged but still be capable of being compiled
      with GCC . To correct GCC , though, this knowledge is pretty much useless, even
      if we were compiler experts. As discussed previously, GCC processes the program
      code at a large number of places (in particular, optimizations), and thus there is no
      direct linkage from a piece of input (such as + 1.0) to a piece of code that handles
      this input. (Contrast this to printing a <SELECT> tag in MOZILLA,for instance.There
      is one piece of code in MOZILLA that does exactly this.)
          To understand what an input such as + 1.0 does, we must take a look into the
      actual computation and see what is going on. Consider a program execution as a
      series of states (Figure 14.1). A difference in the input (such as + 1.0) causes a
      difference in the following states. As the computation progresses, these state differ-
      ences again cause differences in later states.Thus,the differences propagate through
      the computation until they become observable by the user—as the difference that
      makes the program fail.
          The difference between the two inputs is a failure cause, as are the later dif-
      ferences between states. Each state difference, however, is also an effect of earlier
                                                        14.2 Capturing Program States            307



  Input                   Program state (⫽ Variables)                              Final state




FIGURE 14.1
How differences propagate through a program run. An initial difference in the input, such
as + 1.0, causes further differences in the state—up to the ﬁnal difference in the test
outcome.


differences. Thus, the chain of differences forms a cause–effect chain along the
computation—or, in our case, along the GCC run. If we could know what this
cause–effect chain looks like, we would obtain a good understanding of how the
failure came to be.
    The question is: Can we actually leverage such differences by comparing pro-
gram states? And how do we capture program states up front? We shall work our
way through four steps and show:
   1. How to capture program states as memory graphs.
   2. How to compare program states to reveal differences.
   3. How to narrow down these differences to reveal causes.
   4. How to combine the causes into cause–effect chains.
   For the sake of simplicity, we shall ﬁrst study the individual steps on the well-
known sample program (Example 1.1)—and having mastered that,we will face the
mountain of complexity that is GCC. Our key question is:

  HOW DO WE ISOLATE CAUSES IN PROGRAM STATE OR CODE?




14.2 CAPTURING PROGRAM STATES
To see how differences propagate along program states, we must ﬁnd a way of
capturing program states. At the lowest level, this is simple:As the program stores
its state in computer memory,all one needs is a dump of that memory region. When
it comes to comparing program states,though,we want to use the same abstraction
level as when observing a program state—that is, we want to compare (and thus
capture) the program state in terms of variables, values, and structures.
308   CHAPTER 14 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains



          Chapter 8 discussed how to use a debugger to observe arbitrary parts of the
      program state during a program run. A debugger also allows us to list all variables
      of the program—that is, all global variables as well as all local variables of functions
      that are currently active. We call these variables base variables.
          As an example,recall the GDB session from Section 8.3.1 in Chapter 8,where we
      ran the GNU debugger (GDB) on the sample program (Example 1.1). GDB provides
      three commands for listing variables:
         ■ info variables lists the names of global variables.
         ■ info locals shows all local variables in the current frame.
         ■ info args shows all function arguments in the current frame.


         If we stop at the shell_sort() function, for instance, we can examine all local
      variables.
         (gdb) break shell_sort
         Breakpoint 1 at 0x1b00: file sample.c, line 9.
         (gdb) run 9 8 7
         Breakpoint 1, shell_sort (a=0x8049880, size=4)
             at sample.c:9
         9           int h = 1;
         (gdb) info args
         a = (int *) 0x8049880
         size = 4
         (gdb) info locals
         i = 0
         j = 10
         h = 0
         (gdb) _

      By moving through the stack frames,we can obtain all variable values for the calling
      functions.
         (gdb) frame 1
         #1 0x00001d04 in main (argc=3, argv=0xbffff6fc)
             at sample.c:36
         36          shell_sort(a, argc);
         (gdb) info args
         argc = 4
         argv = (char **) 0xbffff7a4
         (gdb) info locals
         a = (int *) 0x8049880
         i = 3
         (gdb) _

      sample has no global variables; otherwise, we could have obtained them via GDB’s
      info variables command.
         With these names and values, we can easily capture a program state as a map-
      ping of base variables to values, as outlined in Table 14.1. For the sake of avoiding
      ambiguity, we sufﬁx each (local) variable with its frame number. This way, a0 —the
                                                        14.2 Capturing Program States    309




                  Table 14.1 Base Variables of the sample Program
                      Variable       Value       Variable               Value
                      a0           0x8049880        argc1                4
                      size0            4            argv1          0xbffff7a4
                      i0               0               a1         0x8049880
                      j0              10               i1                3
                      h0               0               —                 —



            Table 14.2      Derived Variables of the sample Program
             Variable      Value   Variable    Value         Variable           Value
             a0 [0]           9     a1 [0]      9           argv1 [0]        “sample”
             a0 [1]           8     a1 [1]      8           argv1 [1]           “9”
             a0 [2]           7     a1 [2]      7           argv1 [2]           “8”
             —              —         —         —           argv1 [3]           “7”
             —              —         —         —           argv1 [4]           0x0



argument a in frame 0 (shell_sort())—cannot be confounded with a1 , the local
variable a in frame 1 (main()).
    Unfortunately, this naive approach is not enough. We must record the values of
references, such as a or argv, and we must take into account the data structures
being referenced. In other words, we must also take care of derived variables such
as argv[0], a[1], and so on. One simple approach toward doing so is to unfold
the program state—that is,follow all references until the state reaches a ﬁx point.
   1. Start with a program state consisting of all base variables and their values.
   2. For each pointer in the state, include the variables it references.
   3. For each array in the state, include its elements.
   4. For each composite data in the state (objects, records, and so on), include
      its attributes.
   5. Continue until the state can no longer be expanded.
    Such a process can easily be automated (by instrumenting GDB, for instance) as
long as we can accurately determine the types and sizes of all objects. (Section A.2.7
in the Appendix sketches how to handle such issues in C.) Doing so for the sample
run reveals a number of derived variables,outlined in Table 14.2.These are obtained
from following the pointers a and argv and including the elements of the arrays
being pointed to.
    Base and derived variables, as outlined in Tables 14.1 and 14.2, form the entire
program state. Every memory location a program can (legally) access is covered.
310   CHAPTER 14 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains



      Unfortunately, a simple name/value representation does still not sufﬁce, because
      aliasing is not reﬂected.Whereas a0 and a1 are different variables, a0 [0] and a1 [0]
      are not. Because the pointers a0 and a1 have the same value, a0 [0] and a1 [0] refer
      to the same location in memory.
          Visual debuggers such as DDD (see Section 8.5 in Chapter 8,on visualizing state)
      have addressed this problem by showing the program state not as pairs of name
      and values but as a graph in which variable values are represented by vertices
      and references by edges. We shall follow the same approach, but (in contrast to
      a debugger) capture the graph for the entire state, obtaining a so-called memory
      graph. The basic structure of a memory graph is as follows:
            ■ Vertices stand for variable values. Each memory location that is accessible via
              some base or derived variable becomes a vertex.
            ■ Edges stand for references. Each reference points to the location being

              referenced. Its expression shows how to access the location.
         As an example, consider the memory graph for sample shown in Figure 14.2.
      Starting from the root vertex at the top, we can follow the individual edges to the
      base variables.The size edge,for instance,brings us to the location where the size
      value (4) is stored. The a variables (one for each frame) both reference the same
      array [...] referencing the three values 9, 8, and 7. Likewise, argv unfolds into an
      array of ﬁve pointers, referencing the strings "sample", "9", "8", and "7"; the ﬁfth
      pointer is NULL.
          Some of the names attached to the references may appear rather cryptic. What
      does (()[0] @ 3) mean, for instance? The string () is a placeholder for the


                                                    <Root>



            i0    j         h               a0               size        a1             i1             argc         argv


        0        10     0          0x8049880             4          0x8049880       3              4          0xbffff7f4



                      (()[0] @ 3)                (()[0] @ 3)                                                        (( )[0] @ 5)


                                     [...]                                                                      [...]



                                ()[0]   ()[1]            ()[2]                ( )[0]          ( )[1]               ( )[2]        ( )[3]      ( )[4]

                            9           8            7                 0xbffff934       0xbffff95b            0xbffff95d    0xbffff95f     0x0


                                                                              ()[0..]          ()[0..]             ()[0..]       ()[0..]


                                                                        "Sample"             "9"                 "8"           "7"



      FIGURE 14.2
      The state of a passing sample run.
                                                                       14.3 Comparing Program States                               311



expression of the parent—in our case,the unambiguous a.The @ operator is special
to GDB, where x @ n means “the array that consists of x and the n — 1 elements
following in memory.”Thus, (a[0] @ 3) stands for the three-element array start-
ing at a[0], and this is exactly what [...] stands for. For a formal deﬁnition, see
Section A.2.1 in the Appendix.



14.3 COMPARING PROGRAM STATES
Once we can extract program states as separate entities, there are many things we
can do with them. We can observe them (as long as we can focus on a manageable
subset),and we can check whether they satisfy speciﬁc properties—although asser-
tions (see Chapter 10) would probably be better tools for this. The most important
thing, though, to do with program states is compare them against program states
observed in different runs or from different program versions.
   As an example of comparing program states, consider Figure 14.3. This memory
graph was obtained from a failing run of sample; namely, the run with the argu-
ments 11 and 14. In this visualization, we have highlighted the differences with
respect to the passing state shown in Figure 14.2. Out of the 19 values, only 8 have
a differing value.This difference in the state is caused by the difference in the input.
However, this difference in the state also causes the difference in the ﬁnal outcome.
Thus, if we search for failure causes in the state, we can focus on the differences (as
highlighted in Figure 14.3).



                                       <Root>


      i0    j       h         a0                size          a1          i1             argc          argv


  0        10   0        0x8049880          3           0x8049880        2           3          0xbffff7a4


                                                                                                      (( )[0] @ 4)
                        (()[0] @ 3)                    (()[0] @ 3)


                                           [...]                                                  [...]


                                   ()[0]     ()[1]        ()[2]          ( )[0]             ( )[1]            ( )[2]      ( )[3]


                               11           14            0        0xbffff8e7       0xbffff90e         0xbffff911        0x0


                                                                         ( )[0..]           ( )[0..]          ( )[0..]


                                                                     "sample"            "11"             "14"



FIGURE 14.3
Differences in the state of the failing sample run.
312   CHAPTER 14 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains



        How does one compute such differences? The basic idea is to compute a
      matching between both memory graphs G and G .
      ■   A vertex in G matches a vertex in G if
          – both vertices are not pointers, and have the same type, value, and size; or
          – both vertices are pointers of the same type and are NULL; or
          – both vertices are pointers of the same type and are non-NULL.
          This rule abstracts from memory locations: Regardless of where a value is stored,
          it can be matched. In Figure 14.3, for instance, argv[0]’s value differs from the
          one in Figure 14.2. As both are non-NULL pointers, though, they match each
          other.
      ■   An edge in G matches an edge in G if
          – the edge expressions are equal, and
          – the source and target vertices match each other.
      Any vertex or edge that is not matched thus becomes a difference.
          The question is now: How do we establish the best possible matching? This
      is an instance of the largest common subgraph problem, which is known to be
      NP-complete. The best-known algorithms have a running time that is exponential
      in the number of vertices. A pragmatic alternative is to compute a large common
      subgraph (and thus a large matching) by parallel traversal. Starting from the Root
      vertex, we determine all matching edges originating from the current vertex and
      ending in a vertex with matching content. These edges and vertices become part
      of the common subgraph. The process is then repeated recursively. The resulting
      common subgraphs are not necessarily the largest but are sufﬁciently large for prac-
      tical purposes. The complexity is that of a simple graph traversal. (Details of the
      algorithm are found in Section A.2.4 in the Appendix.)


      14.4 ISOLATING RELEVANT PROGRAM STATES
      Focusing on the differences between two states can already be helpful for
      debugging—simply because the differences in the state cause the failure.As pointed
      out in Chapter 12, though, we normally do not search for some cause but for actual
      causes—that is, minimal differences between the world in which the failure occurs
      and the alternate world in which it does not occur. In Chapter 13 we saw how
      delta debugging narrows down actual causes in the program input and other cir-
      cumstances. Can we apply similar techniques to automatically isolate actual causes
      in the program state?
          In principle, we can see each program state as input to the remainder of the
      program run. Thus, we may be able to isolate failure-inducing differences in the
      state just as we did within the original input. What we need, though, is a difference
      we can
          ■   apply to change the passing state into the failing state, and
          ■   decompose into smaller differences to narrow down the actual cause.
                                        14.4 Isolating Relevant Program States           313




EXAMPLE 14.2: GDB commands that change the sample state from passing
to failing
frame 0                    # shell_sort()
set variable size = 3
frame 1                    # main()
set variable a[0] = 11
set variable a[1] = 14
set variable a[2] = 0
set variable i = 2
set variable argc = 3
set variable argv[1] = \
    (char *)strncpy((char *)malloc(3), "11", 3)
set variable argv[2] = \
    (char *)strncpy((char *)malloc(3), "14", 3)
set variable argv[3] = 0x0




    Applying differences is not too difﬁcult. All we need to do is translate the state
differences between G and G into debugger commands that alter the state. In the
two sample graphs shown in Figures 14.2 and 14.3 there are 22 vertices and edges
that are not matched. Thus, we obtain 22 differences, each adding or removing a
vertex or adjusting an edge. These 22 differences translate into 10 GDB commands,
shown in Example 14.2.
    (Details on how to obtain these commands are listed in Section A.2.5 in the
Appendix.) We can apply all of these GDB commands on the passing run, thus
changing the state such that it is identical to the state of the failing run.
        (gdb) break shell_sort
        Breakpoint 1 at 0x1b00: file sample.c, line 9.
        (gdb) run 9 8 7
        Breakpoint 1, shell_sort (a=0x8049880, size=4)
            at sample.c:9
        9           int h = 1;
        (gdb) set variable size = 3
        (gdb) frame 1
        #1 0x00001d04 in main (argc=3, argv=0xbffff6fc)
            at sample.c:36
        36          shell_sort(a, argc);
        (gdb) set variable a[0] = 11
        (gdb) set variable a[1] = 14
   ..
    .

        (gdb) set variable argv[3] = 0x0
        (gdb) _

Because the program state determines the remainder of the execution,the remaining
behavior is exactly the behavior of the failing run.
314   CHAPTER 14 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains



          (gdb) continue
          Continuing.
          Output: 0 11

          Program exited normally.
          (gdb) _
           Let’s summarize. If we apply no differences, we get the unchanged passing run.
      If we apply all differences, we get the failing run. Consequently, one or more of the
      differences in the program state must form the actual cause of the failure.
          To decompose differences, we could simply take the individual debugger com-
      mands and ﬁnd out which of these are relevant for producing the failure. However,
      it is wiser to operate at a higher level of abstraction—that is, at the memory graph
      level. The following is the plan:
         1. Take a subset of the memory graph differences.
         2. Compute the appropriate debugger commands.
         3. Apply them to the passing run.
         4. Resume execution.
         5. See whether the failure still occurs or not.
          This can be easily implemented in a test function and then invoked from a delta
      debugging algorithm such as dd. By applying a subset of the differences, we effec-
      tively create a mixed program state containing parts of the passing state and parts
      of the failing state.After resuming execution,we assess whether a mixed state results
      in a passing ( ), failing ( ), or unresolved ( ) outcome (Figure 14.4).
          Eventually, delta debugging should isolate a relevant difference—at least, this
      is our hope, as it may well be that such mixed states always result in unresolved
      outcomes.



                        Passing state                                      Failing state




                                                  Mixed state



                                                                                 

                           Test outcome                     

      FIGURE 14.4
      Narrowing down state differences. Depending on the test outcome, delta debugging uses the
      mixed state either as a passing or as a failing state. If the test outcome is unresolved ( ), delta
      debugging creates a new mixed state.
                                             14.4 Isolating Relevant Program States             315



                       25
                                                                     cpass
                                                                      cfail
                       20


                       15

              Deltas
                       10


                        5


                        0
                            0   1          2            3           4            5
                                           Tests executed

FIGURE 14.5
Isolating the failure-inducing state in sample. After ﬁve tests, delta debugging has narrowed
down the failure cause to one single variable.


   Applied to sample, it turns out that delta debugging performs quite well.
Figure 14.5 shows what happens if we actually run dd on the sample differences.
■   Test 1: In the ﬁrst test, dd applies half the differences, resulting in all of a[], i1 ,
    size, argc, and argv[] being set to the failing state. It turns out that the failure
    (0 being output) still persists, and thus the variables j, h, and i0 are ruled out as
    causes.
■   Test 2: dd only sets a[] and argv[1]. The failure occurs. Now, i1 , size, and
    argc are ruled out.
■   Test 3: dd only sets argv[1]. The test passes, ruling out argv[1] as a failure
    cause. Only a[] remains.
■   Test 4: dd sets a[0] = 11. The test passes, ruling out a[0].
■   Test 5: dd sets a[0] = 11 and a[1] = 14. The test also passes, ruling out a[1].
    The only difference that remains after ﬁve tests is a[2]. Setting a[2] = 0 in the
passing run causes the failure in sample. Thus, dd reports a[2] as an actual failure
cause. The failure occurs if and only if a[2] is zero.
    Is this a good diagnosis? Yes, because it immediately helps in understanding the
failure. If I sort 11 and 14, the value of a[2] should not inﬂuence the outcome at
all—yet it does. Therefore, this diagnosis points immediately to the defect.
    On the other hand, this example raises some of the delta debugging issues dis-
cussed in Section 13.8 in Chapter 13. In particular, it shows that although delta
debugging returns causes (such as a[2]) it need not return infections (such as
size). One might wish to have dd isolate an infection such as the value of size.
316   CHAPTER 14 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains



      However, although size has a different value in the two runs, and could thus be
      isolated as the cause, changing size from 3 (the value in the failing run) to 4 (the
      value found in the passing run) only changes the outcome if a[2] is also set to zero.
          However, even if delta debugging “only” returns causes, these causes can again
      be very helpful in understanding how the failure came to be. We have built a pro-
      totype called IGOR (“Igor, go fetch bugs!”) that runs the previously cited steps
      automatically. It determines the places to compare states,determines the differences,
      and runs delta debugging on the differences. IGOR can be downloaded (it is open
      source) and installed on your system. Originally,there also was an automated debug-
      ging server ASKIGOR that provided a public interface. Figure 1.9 shows ASKIGOR
      with a diagnosis for sample, computed as described in this section.




      14.5 ISOLATING CAUSE–EFFECT CHAINS
      Let’s now go back to the original problem and address the GCC failure. A + 1.0 in
      the input is the beginning of a long cause–effect chain that eventually leads to the
      failure.
          Because GCC executes for a long time, the ﬁrst question is:At which locations
      should IGOR compare executions? For technical reasons, we require comparable
      states. Because we cannot alter the set of local variables, the current program coun-
      ters and the backtraces of the two locations to be compared must be identical. In
      addition to this constraint, though, we can choose arbitrary locations during execu-
      tion. Because the causes propagate through the run, the cause–effect chain can be
      observed at any location.
          However, for crashing programs such as GCC the backtrace of functions that
      were active at the moment of the crash have turned out to be a good source for
      locations. Example 14.3 shows the backtrace of the crash. Given a backtrace, IGOR
      starts with a sample of three events from the backtrace.
         ■ After the program start—that is, the location at the bottom of the backtrace,
           when GCC’s subprocess cc1 reaches the function main().
         ■ In the middle of the program run—that is,in the middle of the backtrace,when
           cc1 reaches the function combine_instructions().
         ■ Shortly before the failure—that is, the top of the backtrace, when cc1 reaches

           the function if_then_else_cond() for the 95th time—a call that never
           returns.
         All these events occur in both the passing run r and the failing run r . Let’s
      examine these events (and associated locations) in detail.
      At main(). We start by capturing the two program states of r and r in main().
         The graph G and G has 27,139 vertices and 27,159 edges. To squeeze them
         through the GDB command-line bottleneck requires 15 minutes each.
                                             14.5 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains           317




EXAMPLE 14.3: The GCC backtrace
Frame   Address   Location
#0      0x810b19f in if_then_else_cond( ) at combine.c:6788
   ..
    .
#3189   0x810b19f in if_then_else_cond( ) at combine.c:6788
#3190   0x8105449 in simplify_rtx ( ) at combine.c:3329
#3191   0x8105029 in subst ( ) at combine.c:3183
  ..
   .
#3198   0x8105029    in subst ( ) at combine.c:3183
#3199   0x8102457    in try_combine( ) at combine.c:1758
#3200   0x810110b    in combine_instructions( ) at combine.c:659
#3201   0x804c7fb    in rest_of_compilation( ) at toplev.c:4092
#3202   0x8183aa4    in ﬁnish_function( ) at c-decl.c:7268
#3203   0x81751ea    in yyparse( ) at c-parse.y:349
#3204   0x804b2f1    in compile_ﬁle( ) at toplev.c:3265
#3205   0x804e59a    in main( ) at toplev.c:5440



        It takes a simple graph traversal to determine that exactly one vertex is dif-
   ferent in G and G —namely, argv[2], which is "fail.i" in r and "pass.i"
   in r . These are the names of the preprocessed source ﬁles as passed to cc1
   by the GCC compiler driver. This difference is minimal, and thus IGOR does not
   need a delta debugging run to narrow it further.
At combine_instructions(). As combine_instructions() is reached,GCC has
   already generated the intermediate code (called RTL for “register transfer list”),
   which is now optimized. IGOR captures the graphs G with 42,991 vertices and
   44,290 edges,as well as G with 43,147 vertices and 44,460 edges.The common
   subgraph of G and G has 42,637 vertices.Thus,we have 871 vertices that have
   been added in G or deleted in G . (The graph G is shown in Figure 1.2.)
       The deltas for these 871 vertices are now subject to delta debugging, which
   begins by setting 436 GCC variables in the passing run to the values from the
   failing run (G ). Is there anything good that can come out of this mixed state?
   No. GCC immediately aborts with an error message complaining about an incon-
   sistent state. Changing the other half of variables does not help either.After these
   two unresolved outcomes, delta debugging increases granularity and alters only
   218 variables. After a few unsuccessful attempts (with various uncommon GCC
   messages), this number of altered variables is small enough to make GCC pass
   (Figure 14.6). Eventually, after only 44 tests, delta debugging has narrowed the
   failure-inducing difference to one single vertex,created with the GDB commands.
        set variable $m9 = (struct rtx_def *)malloc(12)
        set variable $m9->code = PLUS
        set variable $m9->mode = DFmode
        set variable $m9->jump = 0
        set variable $m9->fld[0].rtx = loop_mems[0].mem
318   CHAPTER 14 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains



                             900
                             800                                              cpass
                                                                               cfail
                             700

                             600

                             500
                    Deltas   400

                             300
                             200

                             100
                              0
                                   0   5   10   15      20     25   30   35        40   45
                                                     Tests executed

      FIGURE 14.6
      Narrowing at combine_instructions(). After 44 tests, delta debugging has narrowed
      down the failure cause to one single state difference—a PLUS operator.



             set variable $m9->fld[1].rtx = $m10
             set variable first_loop_store_insn->fld[1].rtx->\
                 fld[1].rtx->fld[3].rtx->fld[1].rtx = $m9
         That is, the failure-inducing difference is now the insertion of a node in the RTL
         tree containing a PLUS operator—the proven effect of the initial change ⫹1.0
         from pass.c to fail.c.
      At if_then_else_cond(). Shortly before the failure, in if_then_else_cond()
         IGOR captures the graphs G with 47,071 vertices and 48,473 edges, as well as
         G with 47,313 vertices and 48,744 edges.The common subgraph of G and G
         has 46,605 vertices;1,224 vertices have been either added in G or deleted in G .
            Again, delta debugging runs on the 1,224 differing vertices (Figure 14.7).
         As every second test fails, the difference narrows quickly. After 15 tests, delta
         debugging has isolated a minimal failure-inducing difference—a single pointer
         adjustment, created with the GDB command
             set variable link->fld[0].rtx->fld[0].rtx = link

         This ﬁnal difference is the difference that causes GCC to fail. It creates a cycle in
         the RTL tree. The pointer link→fld[0].rtx→fld[0].rtx points back to link!
         The RTL tree is no longer a tree,and this causes endless recursion in the function
         if_then_else_cond(), eventually crashing cc1.

      The complete cause–effect chain for cc1, as reported by ASKIGOR, is shown in
      Figure 14.8.
         With this summary, the programmer can easily follow the cause–effect chain
      from the root cause (the passed arguments) via an intermediate effect (a new node
                                                14.5 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains      319



                       1400
                                                                  cpass
                       1200                                        cfail

                       1000

                        800
              Deltas
                        600

                        400

                        200

                         0
                              0   2   4   6       8     10   12       14   16
                                           Tests executed

FIGURE 14.7
Narrowing at if_then_else_cond(). After 15 tests, delta debugging has isolated a tree
cycle as the cause for the GCC crash.




FIGURE 14.8
The GCC cause–effect chain as reported by ASKIGOR.
320   CHAPTER 14 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains



      in the RTL tree) to the ﬁnal effect (a cycle in the RTL tree). The entire diagnosis was
      generated automatically from the passing and the failing run. No manual interaction
      was required.
          IGOR required six runs to extract the GCC state (each taking 15–20 minutes)
      and three delta debugging runs (each taking 8–10 minutes) to isolate the failure-
      inducing differences. (Most of this overhead is due to accessing and manipulating
      memory via the GDB command line. A nonprototypical implementation, built into
      GDB or linked with the debuggee, could speed up state access by a factor of 10 to
      1,000.)
          Again, it should be noted that IGOR produces this diagnosis in a fully automatic
      fashion. All the programmer has to specify is the program to be examined as well
      as the passing and failing invocations of the automated test. Given this information,
      IGOR then automatically produces the cause–effect chain as shown in Figure 14.8.




      14.6 ISOLATING FAILURE-INDUCING CODE
      So far, we have been able to isolate causes in the program state. Ultimately, though,
      we are looking for causes in the program code—that is, the defect that causes the
      failure. This implies searching in time for the moment the defect executed and
      originated the infection chain.
          In the GCC example, we assume that the states at main() and the states at
      combine_instructions() are sane. The RTL cycle at if_then_else_cond()
      obviously is not. Thus, somewhere between the combine_instructions() and
      if_then_else_cond() invocation the state must have changed from sane to
      infected. An experienced programmer would thus try to identify the moment in
      time where the transition from sane to infected takes place—for instance, by set-
      ting up appropriate invariant assertions, such as assert(isAcyclicTree(root)),
      in all executed functions that modify the RTL tree.
          However, there is another way of coming closer to the defect—and this can
      also be fully automated. The idea is to search for statements that cause the failure-
      inducing state. In other words, when we ﬁnd a cause in the program state, we
      search the code that created this very cause—in the hope that among these pieces
      of code we ﬁnd the actual defect.
          To ﬁnd such causes in the code, one idea is to look at the variables associated
      with the cause in the program state. Assume there is a point where a variable A
      ceases to be a failure cause, and a variable B begins. (These variables are isolated
      using delta debugging, as described earlier.) Such a cause transition from A to B
      is an origin of B as a failure cause. A cause transition is thus a good place to break
      the cause–effect chain and to ﬁx the program. Because a cause transition may be a
      good ﬁx, it may also indicate the actual defect.
          How do we locate such transitions? The actual algorithm cts is formally deﬁned
      in Section A.3 in the Appendix, but it is easy to see how it works. Figure 14.9
                                                  14.6 Isolating Failure-Inducing Code           321



                     Passing run         Causes          Failing run

                                        argc 5 3

                                                                         Program
                                                                         states
                                        argc 5 3

                                                                         Cause
              Time             shell_sort(a[], argc);                    transition
                                                                         from argc
                                                                         to a{2}
                                        a[2] 5 0




                                                            

FIGURE 14.9
Locating a cause transition. Delta debugging can detect failure causes in the program state at
arbitrary moments in time. When the cause shifts from one variable to another, we can use
binary search in time to narrow down the transition—a statement that is likely to cause
the failure.


sketches its application to the sample program. Before the call to shell_sort(),
delta debugging isolates argc as a failure cause. Afterward, a[2] is the failure cause.
To ﬁnd the moment of that cause transition, we apply delta debugging in the middle
of the interval. Then we repeat the process for the two subintervals, effectively nar-
rowing down the transitions until we ﬁnd only direct transitions from one moment
to the next—that is, at a single statement. Overall, cts returns three direct cause
transitions:
    ■ From argc to a[2] in line 36
    ■ From a[2] to v in line 18
    ■ From v to a[0] in line 22

    Each of these cause transitions is where a cause originates—that is, it points to
program code that causes the transition and thus the failure. a[2] gets its value in
lines 32–35, v gets its value in line 18, and so on. Each of these cause transitions is
thus a candidate for a code correction. Moreover, each is a likely defect. Indeed, the
ﬁrst transition in line 36 of sample is exactly the location of the defect.
    Let’s apply this concept of cause transitions to the GCC example. Table 14.3
outlines all cause transitions occurring in GCC between the invocation and the
failure. We ﬁnd that the failure cause propagates through the GCC execution in four
major blocks:
■   Initially,the ﬁle name ( fail.c) is the failure cause. Called with pass.c,the alternate
    input ﬁle without + 1.0,the error does not occur.This argument is ﬁnally passed
    to the GCC lexer (transitions 1–3).
322   CHAPTER 14 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains




                 Table 14.3 Cause Transitions in GCC
                  No.     Location           Cause Transition to Variable
                   0      Start            argv[3]
                   1      toplev.c:4755      name
                   2      toplev.c:2909      dump_base_name
                   3      c-lex.c:187        finput→_IO_buf_base
                   4      c-lex.c:1213       nextchar
                   5      c-lex.c:1213       yyssa[41]
                   6      c-typeck.c:3615    yyssa[42]
                   7      c-lex.c:1213       last_insn→fld[1].rtx
                                             →fld[1].rtx→fld[3].rtx
                                             →fld[1].rtx.code
                   8      c-decl.c:1213      sequence_result[2]
                                             →fld[0].rtvec
                                             →elem[0].rtx →fld[1].rtx
                                             →fld[1].rtx→fld[1].rtx
                                             →fld[1].rtx→fld[1].rtx
                                             →fld[1].rtx→fld[1].rtx
                                             →fld[3].rtx →fld[1].rtx.code
                   9      combine.c:4271     x→fld[0].rtx →fld[0].rtx




      ■   In the lexical and syntactical analysis (transitions 4–6), it is the actual difference
          in ﬁle content that becomes a failure cause—that is, the characters + 1.0.
      ■   The difference in ﬁle content becomes a difference in the abstract syn-
          tax tree, where + 1.0 induces fld[1].rtx to hold an additional node
          (fld[1].rtx.code is PLUS) in the failing run (transitions 7–8). Thus, the + in
          the input has caused a PLUS node, created at transition 8.
      ■   In transition 9, the failure cause moves from the additional PLUS node to the
          cycle in the abstract syntax tree. We have
              x→fld[0].rtx→fld[0].rtx = x,

           meaning that the node at *x is its own grandchild. That is, we have again found
           the cycle in the RTL tree (albeit involving a different base pointer). As discussed
           in Section 14.5, this cycle ultimately causes an endless recursion and thus the
           GCC crash. However, transition 9 is where this cycle originates!
          At combine.c:4271, the location of the last transition, we ﬁnd a single statement
          return x;

      This line is not likely to be a defect. Let’s take a look at the direct origin of x, in
      combine.c:4013–4019, listed in Example 14.4.
                                          14.6 Isolating Failure-Inducing Code          323



EXAMPLE 14.4: The GCC defect
case MULT:
  /* If we have (mult (plus A B) C), apply the distributive
     law and then the inverse distributive law to see if
     things simplify. This occurs mostly in addresses,
     often when unrolling loops. */

  if (GET_CODE (XEXP (x, 0)) == PLUS)
    {
      x = apply_distributive_law
        (gen_binary (PLUS, mode,
                     gen_binary (MULT, mode,
                                 XEXP (XEXP (x, 0), 0),
                                       XEXP (x, 1)),
                     gen_binary (MULT, mode,
                                 XEXP (XEXP (x, 0), 1),
                                       XEXP (x, 1))));

       if (GET_CODE (x) != MULT)
         return x;
    }
  break;




   This    place   is   where   the   infection   originates.   The   call   to   the
apply_distributive_law() function is wrong. This function transforms
code using the rule
            (MULT (PLUS a b) c) ⇒ (PLUS (MULT a c1 )(MULT b c2 ))
(This application of the distributive law allows for potential optimizations, espe-
cially for addresses.) Unfortunately, in the apply_distributive_law() call
(Example 14.4), c1 and c2 share a common grandchild (the macro XEXP(x, 1)
translates into x→fld[1].rtx),which leads to the cycle in the abstract syntax tree.
To ﬁx the problem, one should call the function with a copy of the grandchild—and
this is how the error was ﬁxed in GCC 2.95.3.
    At this point, one may wonder why cause transitions did not single out the call
to apply_distributive_law() as a cause transition. The answer is simple: This
piece of code is executed only during the failing run. Therefore, we have no state
to compare against, and therefore cannot narrow down the cause transition any
further. Line 4,271, however, has been executed in both runs, and thus we are able
to isolate the failure-inducing state at this location.
    Overall, to locate the defect the programmer had to follow just one backward
dependency from the last isolated cause transition. In numbers, this translates into
just 2 lines out of 338,000 lines of GCC code. Even if we assume the programmer
examines all nine transitions and all direct dependencies, the effort to locate the
GCC defect is minimal.
324   CHAPTER 14 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains



          Of course, cause transitions cannot always pinpoint a defect—simply because
      neither delta debugging nor the isolation of cause transitions has any notion of what
      is correct, right, or true. However, cause transitions are frequently also defects. In
      fact, cause transitions predict defect locations signiﬁcantly better than any of the
      anomaly-based methods discussed in Chapter 11.This was found by Cleve and Zeller
      (2005).
          Applied on the Siemens test suite (see Section 11.2 in Chapter 11), cause tran-
      sitions narrowed down the defect location to 10 percent or less of the code in
      36 percent of the test runs. In 5 percent of all runs, they even exactly pinpointed
      the defect. Again, these ﬁgures do not generalize to larger programs but show the
      potential of the concept.




      14.7 ISSUES AND RISKS
      Section 13.8 in Chapter 13 discussed some issues to be aware of when using delta
      debugging. These issues are also valid for applying delta debugging to program
      states. In particular,
         ■ The alternate (passing) run should be as close as possible to the actual
           (failing) run.
         ■ One may be unable to decompose large differences.
         ■ One should take extra care to avoid artifacts (for instance, by comparing the

           backtrace).
         ■ The actual cause reported may be one of multiple actual causes.
         ■ The actual cause need not be an error.


        In addition, applying delta debugging on program states raises its own issues,
      which one should be aware of.
      How do we capture an accurate state? In C and C++, most of memory manage-
        ment is done by convention, and left to the abilities of the programmer. This can
        lead to ambiguous interpretations of memory content, and thus to inaccurate
        memory graphs. Section A.2.7 in the Appendix lists some potential pitfalls. This
        issue is nonexistent for languages with managed memory such as JAVA or C#,
        because the garbage collector must always know which objects are referenced
        by which other objects.
      How do we ensure the cause is valid in the original runs? Each cause, as repor-
        ted by delta debugging, consists of two conﬁgurations (states) c   and c  such
                                       
                                                                                  
        that the difference ⌬ ⫽ c ⫺ c is minimal. This difference ⌬ between states
        determines whether the outcome is  or  and thus is an actual failure cause.
            However, ⌬ is a failure cause only in a speciﬁc context—the conﬁguration
        c —and this context may or may not be related to the original passing or failing
                                       may not be feasible—that is, there is no possible
        runs. It is conceivable that c
                                                             14.7 Issues and Risks          325



  input such that c   is ever reached. It is yet unknown whether this causes

  problems in practice. A stronger checking for artifacts may avoid the problem.
Where does a state end? As described here, we assume that the program state is
  accessible via an interactive debugger. However, differences may also reside out-
  side the program memory. For instance,a ﬁle descriptor may have the same value
  in r and r but be tied to a different ﬁle. To some extent, such “greater” states
  can be seen as external input, such that the techniques discussed in Chapter 13
  may be more appropriate.
What is my cost? Determining cause transitions is very expensive—not because
  the algorithms are complex but because the states are very huge and because
  a large number of test runs is required. Furthermore, one needs a signiﬁ-
  cant infrastructure. In contrast, comparing coverage (discussed in Section 11.2
  in Chapter 11) is far more lightweight, can be implemented without much
  risk, and requires just two test runs (which may even be conducted manu-
  ally). On the other hand, it is not as precise. Obviously, you get what you
  pay for.
    The most interesting question for the future is how to combine the individ-
ual automated debugging techniques. For instance, one could combine coverage
and cause transitions and focus on cause transitions occurring in code that exe-
cutes only in failing runs (see Section 11.2 in Chapter 11). One could have delta
debugging focus on state that correlates with failure (see Chapter 11)—and thus
effectively combine correlation,as detected from a large number of runs,with causes,
as determined by additional experiments. If one has a speciﬁcation of what’s cor-
rect, right, or true (see Chapter 10), this could effectively guide all searches toward
defects. Obviously, we have come quite far, and there is every reason to believe
that computer scientists will come up with even better tools and techniques in the
future.
    How far can we actually go? Unfortunately, there is no chance we will ever be
able to automate the entire debugging process—in particular, because there can be
no automated way of determining the defect that causes a failure. The argument
is as follows:
■   By deﬁnition,the defect is where the program code deviates from what is correct,
    right,or true. If we know the correct code,though,there is no point in debugging.
    We can simply use the correct code instead.
■   Assume that the defect is where the program state becomes infected. To deter-
    mine whether the state is infected or not requires a complete speciﬁcation of the
    state—at all moments during execution. Such a speciﬁcation is called a correct
    code, and we reenter the argument as previously explained.
■   Furthermore,in the absence of a correct code (or,more precisely,in the absence
    of a ﬁx) we cannot tell whether a defect causes the failure—because we need a
    ﬁx to verify causality. In fact,determining the defect that causes a failure requires
    generating a ﬁx (i.e., writing the correct program).
 326      CHAPTER 14 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains



             Thus, there is no chance of an automatic device that determines the defects—at
          least not until we ﬁnd a way of writing programs automatically. As long as we can
          isolate causes automatically, though, we can come very close to the defects—and
          close to a good explanation of how the failure came to be.



          14.8 CONCEPTS
How To To understand how a failure cause propagates through the program run, one
           can apply delta debugging on program states, isolating failure-inducing variables
           and values.
       To capture program states, use a representation that abstracts from concrete
           memory locations, such as memory graphs.
       To compare program states, compute a large common subgraph. Any value that is
           not in the subgraph becomes a difference.
       To isolate failure-inducing program states, have a test function that
           ■ takes a subset of the memory graph differences,
           ■ computes the appropriate debugger commands,
           ■ applies them to the passing run, and

           ■ sees whether the failure still occurs or not.

       Using this test function in a delta debugging framework will return a 1-minimal
           failure-inducing program state.
       A failure-inducing variable, as returned by delta debugging, can be altered to make
           the failure no longer occur. It is thus an actual cause.This does not mean,though,
           that the variable is infected. It also does not mean that there may be only one
           failure-inducing variable.
       To ﬁnd the code that causes the failure, one can automatically search for cause
           transitions where a variable A ceases to be a failure cause and a variable B
           begins. Such cause transitions are places where the failure can be ﬁxed, and
           they are likely defects.
       To narrow down the defect along a cause–effect chain,search for a cause transition
           from a sane variable to an infected variable.
       Delta debugging on states is a fairly recent technique and not yet fully evaluated.
          Whereas ﬁnding failure causes can be fully automated, ﬁnding the defect that
       causes a failure will always remain a manual activity.



          14.9 TOOLS
           IGOR and ASKIGOR. You can download an open-source command-line version of
             IGOR at http://www.askigor.org/ . The ASKIGOR debugging server is no longer
             active.
                                                            14.10 Further Reading          327




14.10 FURTHER READING
The concept of memory graphs, as described in this book, was ﬁrst formulated by
Zimmermann and Zeller (2002).This paper also contains more details and examples
on how to capture and compare memory graphs.
    The idea of isolating cause–effect chains by applying delta debugging on program
states was developed by Zeller (2002). This paper is also the basis for this chapter.
In this paper, the central tool was called HOWCOME, which is now a part of IGOR.
    The concept of cause transitions was developed by Cleve and Zeller (2005). The
paper describes the details of cause transitions in the sample program, in GCC, and
in the Siemens test suite. All of these papers, as well as recent work, are available at
the delta debugging home page found at http://www.st.cs.uni-saarland.de/dd/ .
    Locating a defect becomes much easier if one has a speciﬁcation handy. Such
a speciﬁcation can be combined with systematic experiments, as discussed in this
chapter. A common issue with model checkers, for instance, is that they can detect
that a program (or, more precisely, its model as a ﬁnite automaton) does not satisfy
a given speciﬁcation but fail to give a precise diagnosis why that would be. To this
end, Groce and Visser (2003) used multiple passing and failing runs to provide a
precise diagnosis, including likely defect locations. In that these runs are generated
on demand, the approach is close to delta debugging on program states. In contrast
to delta debugging, though, the approach can determine defects from nondefects
due to the supplied speciﬁcation. In Chaki et al. (2004), the technique showed
excellent localization capabilities for nontrivial programs.
    To actually compute the largest common subgraph instead of simply some large
subgraph, one can use the approach of Barrow and Burstall (1976), starting from a
correspondence graph as computed by the algorithm of Bron and Kerbosch (1973).
The correspondence graph matches corresponding vertex content and edge labels.
This is very suitable in our case, in that we normally have several differing content
and labels. However, in the worst case (all content and labels are equal) computing
the largest common subgraph has exponential complexity.
    Compilers such as GCC have frequently been the subject of automated debug-
ging techniques. Whalley (1994) describes how to isolate failure-inducing RTL
optimizations in a compiler, using a simple binary search over the optimizations
applied.




EXERCISES
14.1 Once again,consider the bigbang program (Example 8.3). If you change the
     mode variable in line 7, the failure no longer occurs.
     (a) Sketch how the difference in mode propagates through the execution
         and how it prohibits the failure.
     (b) Sketch the cause transitions in bigbang.
328   CHAPTER 14 Isolating Cause–Effect Chains



            (c) Would these cause transitions help in locating the defect? If so, why?
                If not, why not?
      14.2 Download the IGOR command-line tool from http://www.askigor.org/ .
           Use IGOR to obtain a diagnosis for the sample program. If you alter the
           arguments, how does the diagnosis change? Why?
      14.3 Give three examples of cause transitions that are defects,and three examples
           of cause transitions that are not defects.




       So assess them to ﬁnd out their plans,
       both the successful ones and the failures.
       Incite them to action in order to ﬁnd out
       the patterns of movement and rest.
                                                                           – SUN TZU
                                                           The Art of War (c. 400 BC)
                                                                        CHAPTER


Fixing the Defect
                                                                15
Once we have understood a failure’s cause–effect chain, we know how the failure
came to be. Still, we must ﬁnd the place where the infection begins—that is, the
actual location of the defect. In this chapter, we discuss how to narrow down a
defect systematically—and having found the defect, how to ﬁx it.



15.1 LOCATING THE DEFECT
Section 9.5 in Chapter 9 discussed a general strategy for narrowing down infection
sites:

   1. We start with the infected value that deﬁnes the failure (Figure 15.1a).
   2. We determine the possible origins of the infected value, following depen-
      dences in the source code (Figure 15.1b).
   3. Using observation, we check each single origin to determine whether it is
      infected or not (Figure 15.1c). Having found the earlier infection, we restart
      at step 2.

This loop goes on until we ﬁnd an infection with origins that are all sane. The code
producing this infection is the defect.
   Although this process is guaranteed to isolate the infection chain, it is pretty
tedious—especially if you consider the space and time of a simple program exe-
cution. This is where the induction and experimentation techniques discussed in
Chapter 16 come into play. However, although these techniques can determine
causes (or at least anomalies that correlate with failure) they cannot tell where the
defect is—simply because they have no notion of correctness. Therefore, we must
combine induction and experimentation with observation such that the program-
mer can tell (or specify) what is correct or not—and eventually ﬁx the program.
Our key question is:

  HOW DO WE ACTUALLY LOCATE AND FIX THE DEFECT?


                                                                                        329
330   CHAPTER 15 Fixing the Defect



                               Variables                                        Variables


               1                                               1

               2                                               2

               3                                               3

        Time                                            Time
               4                                               4

               5                                               5

               6                                               6

               7                                               7

               8                                               8

                               (a)                                              ( b)

                               Variables                                       Variables


               1                                               1

               2                                               2

               3                                               3

               4                                               4
        Time                                            Time
               5                                               5

               6                                               6

               7                                               7

               8                                               8

                               (c)                                             (d )

      FIGURE 15.1
      Narrowing down a defect: (a) the starting point, (b) following dependences, (c) observing state,
      and (d) asserting an invariant.




      15.2 FOCUSING ON THE MOST LIKELY ERRORS
      In the previous section,we resumed the general strategy for locating the defect along
      the infection chain. It turns out that induction and experimentation techniques
      nicely ﬁt into this strategy. The key is to use them to focus on speciﬁc origins.
      Whenever we have a choice of multiple origins (or, more generally, hypotheses), we
                                          15.2 Focusing on the Most Likely Errors         331



can use automatic induction and experimentation techniques to help us focus on
the most likely origin.
   As an example, let’s reexamine the situation shown in Figure 15.1(c) and con-
tinue to locate the defect.

Assertions (Chapter 10) ensure data sanity over a long moment in time and a wide
   range in space. Any failing assertion by deﬁnition signals an infection. Of course,
   this is something we must focus on. On the other hand, whatever is covered by
   a passing assertion need no longer be considered. In our example, we can use
   an assertion to rule out possible infection origins—simply because the assertion
   guarantees that the state is sane (Figure 15.1d).
Anomalies (Chapter 11) are aspects of the execution the properties of which are
   correlated with failure, such as coverage (Section 11.2) or dynamic invariants
   (Section 11.5). Because of the correlation, it is wise to focus on such anomalies
   ﬁrst.
        In Figure 15.1(d), we still have the choice between two origins. Observing
   the one that is abnormal reveals an infection (Figure 15.2a).
Causes (Chapters 13 and 14) are aspects of the execution (such as input, state, or
   code) that are not only correlated with failure but actually cause the failure, as
   experimentally proven. Therefore, causes are even more likely to indicate the
   defect than anomalies.
        In Figure 15.2( b) we have found a cause transition—a statement that causes
   the failure. As the origin is sane and the target is infected, we have a real defect
   here—and the complete infection chain.


                         Variables                                 Variables


         1                                              1

         2                                              2

         3                                              3

  Time                                           Time
         4                                              4

         5                                              5

         6                                              6

         7                                              7

         8                                              8

                        (a)                                        ( b)

FIGURE 15.2
Narrowing down a defect: (a) anomalies and (b) cause transition.
332   CHAPTER 15 Fixing the Defect



          Although these techniques can help us to focus on speciﬁc origins, we still do
      not know which technique to choose. Starting with those techniques that are most
      likely to ﬁnd the defect, the following is our list:

      Focus on infections. If you already know that some origin is faulty—from a failing
         assertion or via observation—focus on this one ﬁrst and check whether the
         infection causes the failure. Typically, though, we do not know which of the
         origins is infected, and thus have nothing to focus on. Therefore, our priority
         goes to available automated techniques (following).
      Focus on causes. If delta debugging or any other form of experimentation has high-
         lighted some state or input as a failure cause, focus on these causes and check
         whether they are infected.
      Focus on anomalies. Otherwise, of all possible origins, those that are associated
         with anomalies are more likely to contain errors. Focus on these and check
         whether they are infected and cause the failure.
      Focus on code smells. Otherwise, if you have determined code smells in your pro-
         gram (see Section 7.5 in Chapter 7), and if one of these code smells is a possible
         origin,ﬁrst focus on the code smell and check whether it causes infection and/or
         failure.
      Focus on dependences. Otherwise, anything that is not in the backward slice of the
         infected state cannot possibly have caused the infection. Of all possible origins,
         check the backward slice for infections, starting with the closest statements.
              “Cannot possibly”in fact means “cannot legally.” Your program may well ﬁnd
         a way to break the rules and use undeﬁned behavior, as discussed in Section 7.6
         in Chapter 7. This can be prevented by system assertions (see Section 10.8 in
         Chapter 10) or checking for code smells (see Section 7.5 in Chapter 7).

      These rules constitute the “focus on likely origins”step in the TRAFFIC strategy from
      List 1.1. Each potential origin must then be veriﬁed whether it is infected or not,
      and we repeat the process for the infected origin.
          Fortunately,we need not identify every single bit of the infection chain,as we are
      only interested in its origin. Therefore, we make larger gaps—for instance, toward
      the boundaries of functions or packages. These are places where communication
      is restricted (typically, to function arguments), which makes it easier to assess
      whether the state is sane or not.
          If we ﬁnd that some state is sane, we need not consider earlier states. Instead,
      we search forward for the moment in time the infection takes place. Eventually, we
      will ﬁnd some piece of code where the state is initially sane but is infected after
      execution.This is the place where the infection originates—that is,the actual defect.


      15.3 VALIDATING THE DEFECT
      In the focusing rules in Section 15.2, I have constantly emphasized that whenever
      we focus on a potentially erroneous origin we must also check whether it actually
                                                       15.3 Validating the Defect        333



causes the failure. Why is that so? This is simple: Finding an error is not enough;
we must also show that the error causes the failure. When tracing back the infection
chain, we must show at each step that:
   ■ The origin is infected—that is,that the variable value is incorrect or otherwise
     unexpected.
   ■ The origin causes the infection chain—that is,that changing the variable value

     makes the failure (and the remaining infections) no longer occur.
   Let’s brieﬂy examine why both of these steps are necessary.


15.3.1 Does the Error Cause the Failure?
Why do we have to show causality for an infection origin? The ﬁrst reason is that
if we ﬁnd an origin that is infected but does not cause the failure we are being
put on the wrong track. We risk a post hoc ergo propter hoc (“after this, therefore
because of this”) fallacy, as discussed in Section 12.2 in Chapter 12. As an example
of being put on the wrong track, reconsider the example from Section 12.3 in
Chapter 12.
   a = compute_value();
   printf("a = %d\n", a);
   Because the program outputs a = 0, we assume that compute_value() pro-
duces an infection. However, we have not shown that a being zero causes the
program to output a = 0. Indeed, if we change a to 1 the program still outputs
a = 0. Therefore, we know that a does not cause the output.
   As we found in Section 12.3 in Chapter 12, the printf() format is wrong. The
program outputs a = 0 for most values of a. Without verifying the cause, we might
have gone for a long search to determine why a could possibly have become zero.
   Being put on the wrong track is especially dangerous when dealing with “suspi-
cious”origins—variables where we cannot fully tell whether their values are correct
or not. Before following such a scent, you should ensure that the origin actually
causes the error—for instance, by replacing its value with a nonsuspicious one and
checking whether the failure no longer occurs.


15.3.2 Is the Cause Really an Error?
The previous section discussed errors that are not failure causes. Let’s now turn to
another source of problems: failure causes that are not errors.
   Breaking the infection chain for a particular failure is easy. You simply check for
the infected value and ﬁx it for the run at hand. The issue, though, is to break the
cause–effect chain in such a way that we prevent as many failures as possible. In
short, we want our ﬁx to actually correct the program.
   The following is an instance of a ﬁx that makes a failure no longer occur, but
nonetheless fails to correct the program. A loop adds up the balance for a speciﬁc
account.
334   CHAPTER 15 Fixing the Defect



          balance[account] = 0.0;
          for (int position = 0; position < numPositions; position++)
          {
              balance[account] += deposit[position];
          }
      It turns out that the sum for account 123 is wrong, and thus we “ﬁx” it by
      including:
          if (account == 123)
              balance[123] += 45.67;
      Likewise, for some reason, some people do not get their savings bonus:
          if (account == 890 && balance[account] >= 0)
              balance[account] *= 1.05;
      These “ﬁxes” are wrong because they do not correct the program. They ﬁx the
      symptom rather than the cause. The origin of the infections may well be in the
      original claim amounts, which must be investigated.
         The following is a less blatant example. Consider once more the sample program
      from Example 1.1. Assume I have no real clue why the program fails. As I always
      have trouble with loop boundaries, I suspect the number of loop iterations is off by
      one. Thus, I replace the for loop (in line 16)
          for (i = h; i < size; i++)

      with
          for (i = h; i < size ⫺ 1; i++).

      Does this help? Yes, it does:
          $ sample 11 14
          Output: 11 14
          $ _
      This clearly proves that the loop header caused the failure. I may have no clue why
      it was wrong, but at least the program now works. Did I really correct the program?
      I don’t know. What we have here is a case of ignorant surgery.
          Such a “ﬁx” is even worse than the one described earlier. I have changed the
      program to make it work,but I actually have no clue how it works.The actual defect
      that still lurks in the code is likely to produce similar failures in the future. Worse,
      with my“ﬁx”I have introduced a new defect that will manifest itself as soon as some
      other part of the program invokes the “ﬁxed” shell_sort() function.
          The “technique” of twisting and ﬁddling with the code until the failure miracu-
      lously goes away is also known as debugging into existence. We change the code
      although we have not fully understood how the failure came to be. Such a “tech-
      nique” may eventually help in ﬁxing the failure at hand, but it is so likely to induce
      new defects (or simply leave defects in the code) that it is best avoided.
          The Devil’s Guide to Debugging (List 15.1) lists more techniques to be avoided.
      Have fun.
                                                          15.4 Correcting the Defect     335



LIST 15.1: The Devil’s Guide to Debugging
Find the defect by guessing. This includes:
   ■ Scatter debugging statements throughout the program.
   ■ Try changing code until something works.
   ■ Don’t back up old versions of the code.

   ■ Don’t bother understanding what the program should do.

Don’t waste time understanding the problem. Most problems are trivial, anyway.
Use the most obvious ﬁx. Just ﬁx what you see:
   x = compute(y);
   // compute() doesn’t work for y == 17, so fix it
   if (y == 17)
       x = 25.15;
Why bother going all the way through compute()?
Source: McConnell (1993).



15.3.3 Think Before You Code
Does one really need to verify causality for every step in the infection chain? Not if
you have a clear understanding of how the failure came to be. That is, you should
have understood the infection chain to a point such that your hypothesis about the
problem cause becomes a theory—a theory that allows you to exactly predict:
   ■   How your change to the code will break the infection chain.
   ■   How this will make the failure (as well as similar failures) no longer occur.
    One way to ensure you have a theory is to have your ﬁx reviewed by someone
else before applying it. If you can clearly explain how your ﬁx will work, you have
a good theory.
    Of course, your prediction about how our change will correct the program had
better come true. Otherwise, you will know that you have made a huge mistake. If
it comes true, though, and the failure is gone, your change retrospectively validates
causality. Fixing the defect made the failure no longer occur, and therefore the
original defect caused the failure.




15.4 CORRECTING THE DEFECT
Assume you have fully understood the infection chain and prepared a correction
for the problem. Before you apply the correction,be sure to save the original code—
for instance, using the version control system. Then, you actually correct the code.
    Correcting the code can be a great moment. You have reproduced the fail-
ure, observed the execution, carefully tracked back the infection chain, and gained
336   CHAPTER 15 Fixing the Defect



      complete understanding of what was going on. All of this has prepared you for this
      very moment—the actual correcting of the code. (And there was much rejoicing.)
         Unfortunately, all great moments are futile. As soon as you have applied your
      correction, you must take care of four problems, as follows.

      15.4.1 Does the Failure No Longer Occur?
      After correcting the code, you must ensure that the correction makes the failure no
      longer occur. First, this retrospectively validates causality (Section 15.3.3). Second,
      it makes sure we actually solved the problem.
          Ensuring that the correction was successful is easy to determine: If the original
      problem (see Chapter 4) no longer occurs with the changed code, the correction
      was successful. (If you feel like a hero the moment the failure is gone, you have
      not been systematic enough. You should be conﬁdent about the success of your
      correction, but the problem no longer occurring should give you just the last bit of
      conﬁrmation you needed.) If the program still fails after your correction has been
      applied, though, there is still a defect that must be ﬁxed.
      ■   It may well be that a failure is caused by multiple defects, and that removing the
          ﬁrst defect causes the second defect to become active.
      ■   However, there is also a chance that the code you ﬁxed was not a defect at all,
          and that your understanding of the infection chain was wrong. To exclude this
          possibility, work through your earlier observations and experiments, as noted
          in the debugging logbook (see Section 6.5 in Chapter 6). Check whether your
          conclusions are valid, and whether other conclusions are possible.
          Being wrong about a correction should:
          – Leave you astonished.
          – Cause self-doubt, personal reevaluation, and deep soul searching.
          – Happen rarely.
          If you conclude that the defect might be elsewhere, bring back the code to
      its original state before continuing. This way, your earlier observations will not be
      invalidated by the code change.

      15.4.2 Did the Correction Introduce New Problems?
      After correcting the code, you must ensure that the correction did not introduce
      new problems. This, of course, is a much more difﬁcult issue—especially because
      many corrections introduce new problems (List 15.2). Practices that are most useful
      include the following.
          ■ Having corrections peer reviewed, as mandated by the problem life cycle (see
            Chapter 2). A software change control board (SCCB) can organize this.
          ■ Having a regression test ready that detects unwanted behavior changes. This

            is another reason to introduce automated tests (see Chapter 3).
                                                          15.4 Correcting the Defect           337



LIST 15.2: Facts on Fixes
■   In the ECLIPSE and MOZILLA projects, about 30 to 40 percent of all changes are ﬁxes
    (Śliwerski et al., 2005).
■   Fixes are typically two to three times smaller than other changes (Mockus and Votta,
    2000).
■   Fixes are more likely to induce failures than other changes (Mockus and Weiss, 2000).
■   Only 4 percent of one-line changes           introduce   new    errors   in   the   code
    (Purushothaman and Perry, 2004).
■   A module that is one year older than another module has 30 percent fewer
    errors (Graves et al., 2000).
■   Newly written code is 2.5 times as defect prone as old code (Ostrand and Weyuker, 2002).
    (All ﬁgures apply to the systems considered in the case studies.)


    Do not attempt to ﬁx multiple defects at the same time. Multiple ﬁxes can inter-
fere with one another and create failures that look like the original one. Check each
correction individually.


15.4.3 Was the Same Mistake Made Elsewhere?
The defect you have just corrected may have been caused by a particular mistake,
which may have resulted in other similar defects. Check for possible defects that
may be caused by the same mistake.
   The following is a C example. The programmer copies a character string from
a static constant t[] to a memory-allocated area s, using malloc(n) to allocate
n characters, strlen(t) to determine the length of a string t, and strcpy(s, t) to
copy a string from t to s.
    char t[] = "Hello, world!";
    char *s = malloc(strlen(t));
    strcpy(s, t);

   What’s wrong with this code? In C, character strings are NUL -terminated.
A ﬁve-character string such as Hello actually requires an additional NUL char-
acter in memory. The previous code, though, does not take the NUL character
into account and allocates one character too few. The corrected code should
read:
    char t[] = "Hello, world!";
    char *s = malloc(strlen(t) + 1);
    strcpy(s, t);

    The programmer may have made the same mistake elsewhere, which is why it
is useful to check for further occurrences of strlen() and malloc(). This is also
338   CHAPTER 15 Fixing the Defect



      an opportunity to refactor the code and prevent similar mistakes. For instance, the
      previous idiom is so common that one might want to use the dedicated function
         char t[] = "Hello, world!";
         char *s = strdup(t);

      where strdup(s) allocates the amount of required memory—using malloc
      (strlen(s) + 1) or similar—and copies the string using strcpy(). By the way,
      strdup() can also handle the case that malloc() returns NULL.


      15.4.4 Did I Do My Homework?
      Depending on your problem life cycle (see Chapter 2), you may need to assign a
      resolution (such as FIXED) as to the problem.You also may need to integrate your ﬁx
      into the production code, leaving an appropriate log message for version control.
          Finally, you may wish to think about how to avoid similar mistakes in the future.
      We will come to this in Chapter 16.




      15.5 WORKAROUNDS
      In some cases, locating a defect is not difﬁcult, but correcting the defect is. The
      following are some reasons this might happen:
         ■ Unable to change. The program in question cannot be changed—for instance,
           because it is supplied by a third party and its source code is not available.
         ■ Risks.The correction induces huge risks—for instance,because it implies large

           changes throughout the system.
         ■ Flaw. The problem is not in the code, but in the overall design—that is, the

           system design must undergo a major revision.
      In such situations,one may need to use a workaround rather than a correction—that
      is, the defect remains, but one takes care that it does not cause a failure.
           Such a workaround can take care to detect and handle situations that would
      make the defect cause a failure. It can also take place after the defect has been
      executed, correcting any undesired behavior.
           A workaround is not a permanent solution, and is typically speciﬁc to the situa-
      tion at hand. Workarounds thus tend to reintroduce the failure again after a change
      has taken place. Therefore, in implementing a workaround it is important to keep
      the problem open (in the tracking system, for instance) so as to later implement a
      proper solution.
           Of course, if there were a better solution available immediately one would use
      that instead of a workaround. But at least a workaround solves the problem—for
      now. In practice, customers often ﬁnd themselves living with workarounds for long
      periods of time. List 15.3 outlines a few.
                                                                           15.7 Concepts          339



LIST 15.3: Some Common Workarounds
Spam ﬁlters are a workaround for solving a ﬂaw in the email system. Anyone can forge arbitrary
   messages and conceal his or her true identity. The proper solution would be to redesign
   the entire email system, even incurring all associated costs and risks.
Virus scanners are a workaround to what is a ﬂaw of some operating systems. By default,
    every user has administrator rights, and thus any downloaded program can gain complete
    control over the machine. The proper solution would be to assign users limited rights and
    ask them for proper authorization before attempting to change the system. Unfortunately,
    too many regular programs (and their installation routines) assume administrator rights,
    and thus the fundamental problem is not easy to change.
Date windowing is a workaround to the inability of many legacy systems to deal with four-
   digit years. The workaround consists of having the systems still keep two-digit years and
   resolving ambiguity by deﬁning a 100-year window that contains all years in the data. If the
   100-year window begins in 1930, for instance, then 27 refers to the year 2027, whereas
   35 means the year 1935. The genuine solution, of course, would be to adapt the legacy
   system—but again, this incurs costs and risks.




15.6 CONCEPTS
To isolate the infection chain, transitively work backward along the infection How To
   origins.
To ﬁnd the most likely origins, focus on:
       ■ Failing assertions (Chapter 10)
       ■ Causes in state, code, and input (Chapters 13 and 14)
       ■ Anomalies (Chapter 11)

       ■ Code smells (Chapter 7)

Function and package boundaries are good places to check for infection origins.
For each origin, ensure that it is an infection as well as a cause.
   If a correction is too costly or too risky,apply a workaround (the defect remains
        in the program but the failure no longer occurs).
To correct the defect, wait until you can predict:
        ■ How your change to the code will break the infection chain.
        ■ How this will make the failure no longer occur.

To ensure your correction is successful, check whether:
        ■ The correction makes the failure no longer occur.
        ■ The correction does not introduce new problems.
        ■ The mistake leading to the defect has caused other similar defects.

To avoid introducing new problems, useful techniques include:
      ■ Having corrections peer reviewed.
      ■ Having a regression test ready.
340   CHAPTER 15 Fixing the Defect




      15.7 FURTHER READING
      McConnell (1993) is a great read on how to ﬁx programs properly.



      EXERCISES
      15.1 Sommerville (2001) describes the four stages of the debugging process
           (Figure 15.3). Develop a more detailed model in which “Locate Error” is
           expanded into at least six stages.
      15.2 Consider the bigbang code shown in Example 8.3. Where would you locate
           the defect and how would you correct it?
      15.3 For the bigbang code, devise three ﬁxes that make the concrete failure no
           longer occur, but that do not correct the program—that is, so that minor
           variations can still reintroduce the failure.
      15.4   In addition to the TRAFFIC model, there can be other systematic processes to
             locate the defect. Sketch two.
      15.5 Illustrate, using an example, the difference between “good” and “bad” ﬁxes.
      15.6 The following piece of code is supposed to read in a number of elements,
           and to print their sum.
                 n = read(); // Number of elements
                 for (int i = 0; i < n; i = i + 1)
                     a[i] = read();

                 // sum up elements in a[0]..a[n --- 1]
                 sum = computeSum(a, n --- 1);
                 print(sum);
                 Unfortunately, this program has a defect. If you read in the numbers
                 2        // n
                 2        // a[0]
                 2        // a[1]
             the program prints 2 as the sum, rather than 4. It turns out that rather than
             summing up the elements from a[0] to a[n — 1],it computes only the sum
             of a[0] to a[n — 2].


                     Locate           Design               Repair     Retest
                      error         error repair            error    program


      FIGURE 15.3
      The debugging process. Source: Sommerville (2001).
                                                          15.7 Further Reading       341



       1. The following are suggestions for ﬁxing the bug. Which one of these
          actually causes the failure to disappear?
          (a) Replace the computeSum() call by the following piece of code.
                 sum = 0;
                 for (int i = 0; i < n; i = i + 1)
                    sum += a[i];
         (b) Add the following piece of code after the computeSum call.
                 if (n == 2 && a[0] == 2 && a[1] == 2)
                     sum = 4;
          (c) Fix computeSum() such that it conforms to its speciﬁcation.
          (d) Replace the computeSum(a, n — 1) call with computeSum(a, n)
              and ﬁx the speciﬁcation such that it conforms to the actual behavior
              of computeSum.
       2. How do these ﬁxes rate in terms of generality (ﬁxing as many failures
          as possible) and maintainability (preventing as many future failures as
          possible)? Rank the alternatives, justifying your choices.
15.7   Consider the “ﬁx” to the sample program in Section 15.3.2. Is the program
       actually correct?




 Would that I discover truth as easily as I can uncover falsehood.
                                                                        – CICERO
                                                                         (44 BC)
                                                                       CHAPTER


Learning from Mistakes
                                                               16
At the end of each debugging session,one wonders how the defect could have come
to be in the ﬁrst place. This chapter discusses techniques to collect, aggregate, and
locate defect information; techniques to predict where the next defects will be;
and what to do to prevent future errors.



16.1 WHERE THE DEFECTS ARE
In Figure 1.10, we have already seen a visualization of the defect distribution in
ECLIPSE, showing for every single component how frequently it was involved in
ﬁxing a defect. As you can see, the distribution of defects across packages is very
uneven. For instance,compiler components in ECLIPSE have a defect density that is
four to ﬁve times higher than in user-interface components.This uneven distribution
of defects is typical for software projects. It is commonly known as Pareto’s law:
80 percent of the defects are found in 20 percent of the modules.
   Pareto’s law also holds if one focuses on speciﬁc subsets of defects. Figure 16.1
shows the distribution of vulnerabilities across the components of MOZILLA
(commonly known as the FIREFOX Internet browser); here, the darker a com-
ponent is, the more vulnerabilities it has. A vulnerability is a defect in one or
more components that manifests itself as some violation of a security policy; again,
the distribution was obtained by relating the MOZILLA vulnerability advisories to
the MOZILLA change database. Again, the distribution of defects is uneven: While
usual suspects, such as the JAVASCRIPT interpreter (“js,” bottom left in ﬁgure),
account for several vulnerabilities, 96 percent of all components never had a single
vulnerability—or at least, none discovered yet.
   Once we have such a defect distribution, we can use it to guide the debug-
ging process toward the usual suspects. Suppose we are searching for a defect
and have the choice between multiple components to examine. Then, the pre-
vious defect history becomes an important factor in prioritizing the search: If a
component had several defects in the past, it is likely to have more waiting to be
uncovered.
   The main usage of such defect distributions,though,is to use them to learn from
the past. By focusing on those components with the most defects, or otherwise           343
344        CHAPTER 16 Learning from Mistakes




FIGURE 16.1
Vulnerability distribution in MOZILLA . Each rectangle stands for a component; the darker the rectangle,
the more vulnerabilities were discovered (and ﬁxed) in the component after release. Source:
Neuhaus et al. (2007).

           investigating the defect history, we can check whether we have multiple defects
           with common properties—and learn from such defect patterns to avoid them in
           the future. In the remainder of this chapter, we discuss the key question:

              HOW CAN WE LEARN FROM PAST DEFECTS TO PREVENT FUTURE ONES?




           16.2 MINING THE PAST
           Before we discuss how to interpret data on earlier defects, let us ﬁrst show how
           to obtain such data. Generally, past defect data are easily obtained from existing
           sources. The ﬁrst source is the version archive, which records all changes to the
           system. Of course, we do not want to investigate these changes manually, but rather
           automate as much as we can. Unfortunately, such automation rarely comes as a
           turnkey solution—one has to set up or adapt appropriate fact extractors for the
           situation at hand. The ﬁrst task is to distinguish the different types of changes—in
                                                            16.2 Mining the Past        345



general,we only want the subset that are ﬁxes. There are a number of ways to extract
just the ﬁxes:
Relate changes to problems. Problem databases (see Chapter 2) store all problems
   ever encountered with the software. If a problem is listed as ﬁxed, there should
   be a corresponding change in the version database. Such a corresponding change
   can be found by
   ■ Checking the log message of the change against the PR number as stored

     in the problem database. Here is a typical log message that contains a PR
     number:
         Fixed bug #3547.

   ■  Check the closing time of the problem report. Typically, developers will
      commit their ﬁx to the change database immediately before marking the prob-
      lem report as closed, so simply checking for the developer’s change activity in
      the few minutes before closing the report will likely point you to the related
      change.
       The advantage of relating bug and change databases is that it provides addi-
   tional information about the original defect, such as its severity. (You normally
   want to ﬁlter out problems classiﬁed as trivial or request for enhancement.)
   Also, you can check when and by whom the problem was discovered: in-house,
   during beta testing, or in production code. The disadvantage is that there will
   still be noise:In experiments with ECLIPSE and MOZILLA, Śliwerski et al. (2005a)
   could only relate about 50 percent of “closed” problem reports to a ﬁx.
Check for changes in maintenance branches. Once a product is released, many
  organizations create a dedicated maintenance branch off the main versioning
  trunk—a branch in which only ﬁxes to the released product are committed.
  By assessing only such maintenance branches, you obtain the subset of ﬁxes.
  The advantage of this approach is that it provides precise information without
  requiring a problem database. The disadvantage is that it requires discipline and
  effort to set up and keep up the standards.
Check the message log for keywords. A simple way to identify ﬁxes is to just check
  the log message for keywords such as “ﬁx,” “bug,” “problem,” “defect,” “crash,”
  and so on: If one of these keywords appears in the log message of a change, then
  the change is likely a ﬁx:
       Program crashed when encountering end-of-file on input.

       The advantage of this approach is that it is very lightweight.The disadvantage
   is that it does not provide information about the original problem, and where
   it was discovered. If the problem was discovered by in-house testing, that is
   just ﬁne—that is what in-house testing is there for. If the problem was discov-
   ered by one of your biggest customers, you deﬁnitively want to improve your
   in-house testing such that the problem does not occur again. In practice, such
346   CHAPTER 16 Learning from Mistakes



          keyword information is thus typically used together with problem databases or
          maintenance branches.
          None of these methods is perfect—there will always be problem reports that
      cannot be mapped to a ﬁx and vice versa. If you set up a new project, consider
      tools and conventions that ensure a tight mapping between tasks and changes—
      and while you’re doing that, track effort as well, such that you know how much
      effort went into individual tasks.
          Even with an imperfect mapping, any of these methods (or even a combination
      thereof ) will help you map the large majority of problems to ﬁxes—and thus map
      defects to individual components. Once you have appropriate tools in place, defect
      distributions can be generated and updated at the touch of a button—by mining
      and remining the appropriate software archives.


      16.3 WHERE DEFECTS COME FROM
      Defects that escape into production are typically (and should be) pretty rare events.
      Each defect tells its own story, and by examining past defects and where they
      occurred,you will be able to determine common origins and cross-cutting concerns.
      Here are some ﬁrst questions you should ask yourself:
      ■   Which modules have had the most defects? If a module had several defects in
          the past, it is likely to have more waiting to be uncovered. Consider subjecting
          such a module to thorough quality assurance, or refactor it into smaller, less
          error-prone units.
      ■   When are most defects introduced? Do they originate in the requirements/
          design/coding phase? If speciﬁc phases are more error prone than others,
          you may need to increase quality assurance in these phases, or rework the
          development process.
      ■   Which types of errors occur most often? This can be extracted from descriptions
          of the defect—typically with categories such as “use of noninitialized variable,”
          “bad control ﬂow,”“heap misuse,” and so on. Consider using (or building) tools
          that check for these types of errors.
      ■   Who introduced the defects? Some people create more defects than others—
          simply because they write more code, or because they address the most risky
          issues. If you ﬁnd that some people or groups create more defects than normal,
          assign them to less risky tasks, or consider appropriate training.
              Note that this is a sensitive issue. If developers ﬁnd that information in prob-
          lem or version archives is used against them, they will no longer use these
          tools. Rather than blaming people,create an environment that focuses on ﬁnding
          errors.
         All these measures have the same aim: to ﬁx the development process rather
      than just its product. By ﬁxing the process,we can address the ultimate cause of the
                                               16.4 Errors during Speciﬁcation        347



problem—that is, us as humans and the decisions (and errors) we make. To ﬁx the
process, we must learn what the previous defects have in common such that we
can either ﬁx their common source, or otherwise prevent them in the future. This
is where questions like the ones just noted can help.
    Over time, though, practitioners and researchers alike have identiﬁed common
sources of errors, as well as ways to avoid them and detect them early. In the next
three sections, we discuss three important stages in the development process that
all can introduce defects:
   ■ Speciﬁcation: What is it that makes a speciﬁcation error prone?
   ■ Programming: What is it that makes it hard to translate a speciﬁcation into a
     correct program?
   ■ Quality assurance: How can quality assurance fail to catch the defect?


     For each of these stages, we present a short rationale on how the individual
stage can introduce defects, a set of consequences that improve process qual-
ity, and some ways to measure which parts of the product one should focus on
ﬁrst.



16.4 ERRORS DURING SPECIFICATION
Why is speciﬁcation hard? Complexity in speciﬁcation stems from the sheer quantity
of requirements to be fulﬁlled, as well as the interaction between these require-
ments. The more requirements and constraints there are to be met, the higher the
chance of making a mistake—and the higher the probability of a defect in the
resulting program.
    Finally, the speciﬁcation may be incomplete, inconsistent, frequently changing,
or completely missing. All of these increase the chances of a defect—although in
the absence of precise speciﬁcation, surprise would be a more adequate term.

16.4.1 What You Can Do
When analyzing defects, assess whether they were introduced during the speciﬁca-
tion phase—that is, they could have been avoided by improving the speciﬁcation.
If you ﬁnd that several defects are due to speciﬁcation issues, following are
measures you can take:
Improve quality assurance. Introduce systematic processes for eliciting require-
   ments and software design. Improve better quality assurance on speciﬁcation
   documents. Check speciﬁcations early—the earlier you check your artifacts
   against the requirements of your clients, the more precise the requirements will
   become—in particular, regarding what the product should not do.
Increase the precision. Introduce semiformal or formal methods that allow you to
   catch inconsistencies or incomplete speciﬁcations early.
348   CHAPTER 16 Learning from Mistakes



      Increase the degree of automation. The more development tasks you can auto-
         mate, the less chances there are that the humans involved make mistakes.
         Consider contracts, assertions, and other forms of speciﬁcations that can
         be validated automatically (see Chapter 10). Generative techniques such as
         model-driven development also take humans out of the loop.
          Note that these are general recommendations that have held for several pro-
      jects in the past, but may not necessarily hold for yours. You should always go and
      validate these recommendations against the true defect distribution in your project,
      as obtained from history. Once you do that, though, you will have excellent facts in
      your hand when it comes to suggesting or implementing process improvements.


      16.4.2 What You Should Focus On
      Although it won’t hurt to improve overall speciﬁcation quality, you would normally
      prefer to focus on those problems that hurt most—that is,those components where
      the most defects related to speciﬁcation issues have been found. This requires a
      manual classiﬁcation of the origin of the problem: If the problem is due to a bad
      speciﬁcation, it should be examined further.
          However, you may not want to wait with your analysis until the product has
      been released—but rather check for early warning signs already during devel-
      opment. Unfortunately, checking whether a speciﬁcation is adequate is hard to
      measure directly. If speciﬁcation comes in natural language (as is mostly the
      case), human assessment will always be necessary. Formal speciﬁcations can be
      checked for internal consistency and completeness—but may still miss the client’s
      requirements.
          Problems with speciﬁcations frequently translate into problems during develop-
      ment, though—and these can be measured as follows:
      ■   A history of frequent changes is a symptom of changing or incomplete speci-
          ﬁcations, as the component must constantly be adapted. A number of studies
          have found that a high number of changes in a component correlates with
          the number of defects. Therefore, components that are frequently changed
          should be checked whether their speciﬁcation can be made more stable and
          precise.
      ■   Some problem domains are more complex than others, resulting in more com-
          plex speciﬁcations, and thus a higher chance of defects. For instance, compiler
          components in ECLIPSE have shown a defect density that is four to ﬁve times
          higher than in user interface components. Be sure to identify these problem
          domains and focus on them to improve speciﬁcation quality.
         Again,what has been observed for other projects is likely to hold for yours,too—
      but it is much better to have facts in your hand before making decisions. If you can
      show that defects correlate with frequent changes in your program, too, you will
      know what to focus on.
                                              16.5 Errors during Programming           349




16.5 ERRORS DURING PROGRAMMING
In a program, the functionality as originally speciﬁed is spread and detailed across
several components. Again, the more requirements and constraints there are to be
met by a single component, the higher the chance of a defect in this component.
    Furthermore, programs show structural complexity:
   ■ The more possible paths a computation can take (both controlwise and data-
     wise),
   ■ the longer these paths, and
   ■ the more components involved in the computation,


the greater the chance of introducing an infection in one of these paths—and the
higher the chance of a failure.

16.5.1 What You Can Do
A defect means that code does not match its speciﬁcation—and if the speciﬁcation
(Section 16.4) is correct, then the code must be wrong. Here are some measures to
take to avoid errors:
Improve programming as you improve specifying. A complex speciﬁcation always
  translates into a complex program. (If there were a simple program, we could
  also come up with a simple speciﬁcation.) Thus, anything you can do to make
  the speciﬁcation more precise, complete, or better validated, as discussed in
  Section 16.4, will also improve the program as follows:
   ■ Improve quality assurance of speciﬁcations.
   ■ Increase the precision of speciﬁcations.
   ■ Increase the degree of automation.


Reduce complexity. The higher the structural complexity of a program, the more
  ways there are for some part of the program to inﬂuence another—and the easier
  it is for infections to spread. Limiting the information ﬂow and the amount of
  interaction between components
   ■ Reduces the chance of an infection becoming a failure.
   ■ Makes it easier to validate the possible paths and behaviors.
   ■ Facilitates program understanding and reviewing.

   All this is achieved by good software design, thereby reducing risk and reducing
   complexity.
Improve documentation. When writing software, write for humans just as well as
  you write for the machine. Misunderstanding how a piece of software works
  is a frequent cause of problems when using or changing it. Documentation
  should be thorough and precise; if it is too verbose, consider breaking a com-
  ponent into simpler pieces. Assertions (see following) combine documentation
  and validation in a single attractive package.
350   CHAPTER 16 Learning from Mistakes



      Set up assertions. If good software design limits the spread of infections,assertions
         catch them right away. If,while debugging,you have inserted assertions to narrow
         down the infection,keep them in the code. If some assertion would have helped
         catching the infection, go and write one. These assertions will catch similar
         infections in the future. At the very least, they will help during the debugging
         process. Consider keeping assertions active in production code (see Section 10.9
         in Chapter 10).
      Improve training. Many defects come to be because of simple mistakes. If you can
         characterize and summarize these mistakes to recurring patterns, go and make
         sure your programmers know about these patterns, and how to avoid them.
      Change your programming language. Most features in new programming lan-
         guages are designed to avoid the programming errors as experienced by the
         users or older programming languages. This is how great error-avoiding con-
         cepts like static typing, garbage collection, synchronized threads, or design by
         contract came along. If you can relate problems to features (or missing features)
         of a programming language, consider alternatives for your next project.

      16.5.2 What You Should Focus On
      Development is a stage in which problems with speciﬁcations manifest themselves.
      ■   Recent code changes before release need a special focus, because code changed
          at the last minute may not be as thoroughly tested as older code.This risk comes
          in addition to the history of frequent changes as an early indicator of potential
          problems, as discussed in Section 16.4. Frequency and recency of changes can
          be mined from the version archive; focus on those components with the most
          and most recent changes.
      ■   Component imports—that is the set of components interacted with—can char-
          acterize the domain of a component, and thus the proneness to errors, as
          discussed in Section 16.4.
              In a study of MOZILLA vulnerabilities, Neuhaus et al. (2007) found that vul-
          nerable components shared similar sets of imports. In the case of MOZILLA,
          for instance, they found that of the 14 components importing nsNodeUtils.h,
          13 components (93 percent) had to be patched because of security leaks. The
          situation is even worse for those 15 components that import nsIContent.h,
          nsIInterfaceRequestorUtils.h, and nsContentUtils.h together—they
          all had vulnerabilities. Identify those imports that correlated with defects in
          the past and focus on them.
         The intrinsic problem of development, namely structural complexity of code,
      can be measured, too.

      Software complexity metrics capture the complexity of programs by counting the
         number of classes, functions, variables, parameters, blocks, branches, or paths in
                                          16.6 Errors during Quality Assurance          351



  a program: the more items, the higher the complexity. Although such metrics
  provide only a crude approximation to complexity, they are easy to compute,
  and have been shown multiple times to be related to effort in comprehension
  and in testing.
     When it comes to defects, though, the picture is less clear. In a study of ﬁve
  Microsoft projects, Nagappan et al. (2006) found that correlation of metrics and
  defects was different in each project, and that complexity metrics should only
  be used when validated from past defect history.
Centrality measures pay special attention to interactions between elements, as
  most complexity metrics only focus on single components.The idea is to examine
  the relation between dependencies and defects. A recent study by Zimmermann
  and Nagappan (2008) on Windows Server 2003 has shown that:
   ■ The more complex the dependencies of a component are, the more defects it
     will have.
   ■ In addition, the presence of cyclic dependencies increases the number of

     defects.
   ■ The more important (central) a component is in the dependency graph, the

     more defects it will have.
   ■ Finally, they also observed a domino effect for binaries: If a component dep-

     ends on defect-prone components, the likelihood of a defect is increased.
       If you focus on components with such properties, you may also catch those
   that are most defect prone. As complexity metrics, centrality measures should
   also be validated from past defect history.




16.6 ERRORS DURING QUALITY ASSURANCE
Everyone knows that humans make mistakes. This is why there is quality assur-
ance—to catch defects before they escape into production. Thus, any problem that
escapes into production also implies a problem in quality assurance.
    What are the reasons for quality assurance to fail to catch a defect? To start
with, all quality-assurance techniques are limited. By its very nature, testing can
only cover a limited set of executions, and there is always a chance to miss some
speciﬁc aspect of the behavior (notably the aspects where the program fails). For-
mal veriﬁcation and other symbolic techniques can cover all behavior, but only at
a certain abstraction layer, and may therefore miss issues as they occur in real-life
environments. No technique can be both concrete enough to capture all aspects
of real life and abstract enough to capture all possible executions. In the end,
all these problems can be reduced to the undecidability of the halting problem,
which makes it generally impossible to predict what a given program will or will
not do.
352   CHAPTER 16 Learning from Mistakes



          This is not to say that one cannot live within these limitations. But again,
      complexity in speciﬁcation or programs directly translates into complexity in qual-
      ity assurance, too—there simply is more to test, check, review, or prove. Even if
      some of these activities can be automated, humans will have to conduct several
      of them, and humans can err during quality assurance just as they can during
      development.

      16.6.1 What You Can Do
      Improve your test suite. Your test suite has failed to detect the problem. Therefore,
         you must extend the test suite such that the problem will not occur again. Your
         extension should not only test for the particular problem, but for related prob-
         lems, too: If you ﬁnd that the original problem was due to, say, a missing null
         pointer check, try to trigger similar errors by additional tests.
      Test early, test often. The earlier you test, the more precise your speciﬁcation will
         be,and the more you test,the more defects you will catch. An automated test (as
         discussed in Chapter 3) that reproduces the original problem is a good starting
         point.
      Review your code. Software inspections have been shown to signiﬁcantly increase
         productivity, quality, and project stability. We have already seen how being
         explicit helps in debugging (see Section 6.4 in Chapter 6). If you need to
         explain what your code does to others (or simply know that others will review
         it), you will also be explicit—and clearly formulate both expectations and
         contributions.
      Improve your analysis tools. Verify whether common tools could have detected
         the defect early—in particular, tools that detect code smells (see Section 7.5 in
         Chapter 7) or tools that verify system assertions (see Section 10.8 in Chapter 10).
         Checking programs statically can help, too—for instance, using the techniques
         discussed in Chapter 7.
      Calibrate coverage metrics. Many people believe in coverage metrics like “Our test
         covered 90 percent of all branches” to express whether a test suite is adequate.
         Unfortunately, even a high-coverage metric does not say much about the true
         quality of your code, unless you managed to cover those 20 percent of most
         of the defects and most of the risk. Therefore, it is better to focus on those
         components that need most of your attention rather than spending lots of effort
         on some piece of code that never showed any problems so far.
      Consider mutation testing. Mutation testing is a technique to evaluate the ade-
         quateness of automated quality assurance. It automatically seeds artiﬁcial defects
         (“mutants”) into the product and then checks whether quality assurance detects
         the mutant. If a mutant is not detected, this suggests that real defects may not
         be detected either. While being computationally expensive, mutation testing is a
         good simulation of a defect’s life cycle—and its results are much more meaningful
         than artiﬁcial coverage metrics.
                                                       16.7 Predicting Problems          353



16.6.2 What You Should Focus On
In quality assurance, you should always focus on those components with the high-
est risk—that is, those with the highest likelihood and the highest severity of a
failure, such as:

Components that have shown risk in the past are obviously the ﬁrst suspects to
  focus on. A defect distribution obtained from version and problem archives, as
  discussed in Section 16.2, is a good starting point. To obtain a measure of risk,
  you need to also assess
   ■ The likelihood of a potential defect causing a failure: Will the defect ever
     be executed at all? How far will the infection spread?
   ■ The severity of the induced failure: How much damage will be caused by this

     failure? Will it lead to major loss of data, functionality, or valuable assets?
Components that are similar to risky ones are also suspect, as problems tend to
  have the same causes. Focus on
   ■   Similarities in change history or problem domains (Section 16.4).
   ■   Imports, complexity metrics, or centrality measures (Section 16.5).
  Formally, this category also comprises all components that have shown risk in
  the past, because the defects reported in the past have been ﬁxed, and thus, the
  “ﬁxed” version of the component is similar to the earlier “risky” version.
Code that is not covered yet by quality assurance naturally is more likely to have
  undiscovered defects, and thus to fail. Therefore, try to achieve some basic
  coverage, such as statement coverage, across the product during quality assur-
  ance. Before moving to more advanced coverage criteria, ﬁrst focus on the risky
  components, as described above.

   Note that all this focusing applies as long as there is a Pareto effect—that is, as
long as there is an uneven distribution of risk across the program. Once the risk is
spread evenly, quality assurance should be spread evenly too.
   By allocating your quality-assurance resources wisely, you will hopefully elim-
inate all of the most risky defects in your product—and, in the process, learn
enough about past defects such that your quality assurance will also catch the
most risky defects in the future.



16.7 PREDICTING PROBLEMS
In the previous sections, we have discussed how to relate features of speciﬁca-
tion, code, or quality assurance to defects. As all data from past defects is readily
available, wouldn’t it be possible to automatically learn which features correlate
with defects, and thus automatically predict problems without the hassle of man-
ual investigation? In the past years, a number of researchers have investigated this
354   CHAPTER 16 Learning from Mistakes



      very question—and devised automatic predictors with surprising precision. In this
      section, we give four examples for such tools.

      16.7.1 Predicting Errors from Imports
      TheVULTURE tool by Neuhaus et al. (2007) is a tool for detecting where in a product
      security vulnerabilities have occurred in the past. VULTURE mines a vulnerability
      database (a special kind of problem database) as well as a version database; using
      the techniques from Section 16.2, it then maps vulnerabilities to ﬁxes and thus to
      components. The vulnerability distribution in MOZILLA ( Figure 16.2) was obtained
      using VULTURE.
          During the work with VULTURE, Neuhaus et al. discovered that vulnerabilities
      could be linked to speciﬁc imports, as discussed in Section 16.5.2: Components
      importing nsNodeUtils.h were all prone to vulnerabilities.They set up a machine
      learner (more speciﬁcally, a support vector machine) that was trained with the
      number of vulnerabilities and the set of imports for each component. The resulting
      support vector model would then also be used for predicting vulnerabilities by feed-
      ing in the imports;the model would then produce an estimate for the vulnerability. In
      an evaluation, Neuhaus et al. found that of all components ﬂagged as vulnerable by
      the model,70 percent turned out to be vulnerable;among those 30 components ﬂag-
      ged as most vulnerable and 88 percent were vulnerable.




      FIGURE 16.2
      How VULTURE works. By mapping vulnerabilities to ﬁxes and thus to components, VULTURE
      can assign an individual vulnerability for each component. By learning which imports correlate
      with vulnerabilities, VULTURE can predict the vulnerability of further components.
                                                       16.7 Predicting Problems         355



16.7.2 Predicting Errors from Change Frequency
In the past three years, Microsoft has conducted extensive research on how to
predict defects in software. In 2005,Nagappan and Ball mined the change and prob-
lem databases ofWindows Server 2003 to examine the relation between code churn,
the extent of change made to a component over a period of time, and defect den-
sity. Using statistical regression models, they found that relative measures of code
churn were high predictors of defect density—that is, those components that were
changed most (in comparison to others) were also the most defect prone.
    Their model is also able to discriminate between defect-prone and non-defect-
prone components—that is, based on the change history, it would predict whether
a component would be defect prone or not. In their experiment,the model reached
an accuracy of 89 percent.

16.7.3 A Cache for Bugs
When a defect is found, it is likely that related locations also contain defects. But
what does “related” mean? In a 2007 study of the defect and change history of
seven open-source projects, Kim et al. (2007) formulated four hypotheses on how
individual defects may be related:
1. Changed components. If a component was changed recently,it will tend to show
   defects soon.
2. New components. If a component has been added recently, it will tend to show
   defects soon.
3. Related time. If a component showed a defect recently,it will tend to show other
   defects soon.
4. Related location. If a component showed a defect recently, “nearby” compo-
   nents will also tend to show defects soon. A “nearby” component is a logically
   coupled component—that is,a component that is frequently changed at the same
   time.
   Based on these hypotheses, Kim et al. built a model that would help in pre-
dicting defects. The model is called “bug cache” because it “caches” the most
defect-prone components.The basic idea is as follows:Starting with an empty cache,
the model processes the event history. Every time an event is detected to satisfy
one of the hypotheses, the concerned components are loaded into the cache; if the
component already is in the cache, its entry is refreshed.
   The cache only holds up to 10 percent of all components; if the cache is full,
the least recently refreshed components are discarded.Thus,the cache always holds
those components that are new, most frequently changed, most recently found to
have a defect, or logically coupled with another component that satisﬁes one of
these criteria. At any time, the cache holds those components predicted to be most
defect prone. In their evaluation, Kim et al. found that the 10 percent of cached
components accounted for 73–95 percent of all defects, which places it among the
most precise defect predictors.
356   CHAPTER 16 Learning from Mistakes




      FIGURE 16.3
      HATARI warns against risky changes. When a change to a location is likely to introduce
      a defect, HATARI annotates the code with a red bar. The redder the bar, the higher the risk.
      Source: Śliwerski et al. (2005).


      16.7.4 Recommendation Systems
      Since both mining change and defect data as well as predictions can be made
      automatically, one could go and integrate the appropriate prediction right into the
      development environment. This is what Śliwerski et al. (2005b) did: They explored
      whether predictions could be made live while the programmer is working. Their
      resulting HATARI tool does this for the risk of change—that is, the risk that some
      change introduces a defect.
           Figure 16.3 shows HATARI in action, integrated into the ECLIPSE programming
      environment. Code that is risky to change is annotated with a red bar (1); the redder
      the bar, the higher the risk of introducing a defect. Additionally, HATARI also lists
      the locations that are most risky to change (2), as well as the risk history—the list
      of all ﬁxes and other changes applied to the current location.
           In Figure 16.3, HATARI is showing the risk of an ECLIPSE method, namely
      resolveClassPath(). It is shown in deep red, because out of nine previous ﬁxes,
      eight introduced a new defect, which places it among the most risky methods to
      change within ECLIPSE. If you attempt to change it, HATARI will warn you against
      it; indeed, HATARI means “risk” in Swahili.

      16.7.5 A Word of Warning
      Although automatic predictions are compelling, we should remind ourselves that
      predictions can only rely on correlations, not on causations. If a speciﬁc feature of
                                                          16.8 Fixing the Process        357



process or product is related to defects, this does not mean that removing the fea-
ture will make the defect go away. The feature may just be a symptom of some
underlying, not yet recognized factor, which will still persist even if the symptom
is eliminated or worked around. Such a symptom is called “fool’s gold,” as it is
easily mistaken for true gold—that is, the actual cause. Thus, with every correlation
you observe, you should have a good theory on why this correlation might be a
causation—and how removing the supposed cause would change the effect, too.
   As an example, consider one of the ﬁrst mining experiments that I conducted
with my then Ph.D. student, Thomas Zimmermann. We wanted to know which
ECLIPSE developers had the highest defect density in the code they produced. To
our surprise, Erich Gamma, the master developer of ECLIPSE (and probably one of
the most inﬂuential programmers and program architects on this planet), on a list
of more than 50 developers, showed up as number 2. In other words, the code
produced by Erich Gamma was the second most defect prone.
    From this fact, one could deduce that Erich Gamma is a lousy programmer, pro-
ducing code that is littered with defects. However, this is “fool’s gold.” The true
cause, as he conﬁrmed to me later when we were sitting together on a plane, is
simply that within ECLIPSE development, there are a number of tasks that nobody
wants to do, because they are too risky. These tasks end up on the desk of the most
experienced developers, and the most risky tasks end up with the boss—that is,
Erich Gamma himself. With this in mind, it is no surprise if you ﬁnd that the most
experienced developers make the most mistakes—this happens because they get
the riskiest jobs, and this again is because they are experienced. Assigning risky
tasks to novices would increase the overall risk, and this is why the relationship
between experience and defects is only a correlation, not a causation. Whatever
correlation an automated mechanism discovers and recommends, always perform
such a causality check before basing decisions on it.




16.8 FIXING THE PROCESS
There are so many ways a program can go wrong—and so many ways the production
process can be wrong, too. It may turn out that the software erroneously was not
tested before release. It may be that the wrong version was shipped to customers.
It may be that some critical part was not reviewed at all. If the history of the prob-
lem indicates there is something wrong with the process, go and ﬁx it. To achieve
perfection, never stop thinking about how you could improve the process.
    Of course, to improve the process, you need to have the means to measure
the state of the art. In this chapter, I have given you some ideas on what could be
measured, and how this can be leveraged to reduce the risk of defects. The more
data you gather, and the better the data are organized, the more you will be able
to discover about your code’s strengths and weaknesses and of your development
process. Gather data on problems, tasks, defects, and effort as much as you can, and
use it to continuously review and improve.
358   CHAPTER 16 Learning from Mistakes



         This approach—gathering as much data as you can—is also used in places where
      the highest quality standards are to be met. The following excerpt from Fishman
      (1996) tells how the people who build the space shuttle software achieve quality:

         The database records when the error was discovered; what set of commands
         revealed the error; who discovered it; what activity was going on when it was
         discovered—testing, training, or ﬂight. It tracks how the error was introduced
         into the program; how the error managed to slip past the ﬁlters set up at every
         stage to catch errors—Why wasn’t it caught during design? During develop-
         ment inspections? During veriﬁcation? Finally, the database records how the
         error was corrected, and whether similar errors might have slipped through
         the same holes in the ﬁlters.

         All of this is being leveraged to ﬁnd out how the error came to be—whether by
      a programmer or as the result of a ﬂaw in the process. That is, the goal is not just
      to ﬁnd errors in the code, but eventually errors in the process.This leads to a very
      disciplined way of building software. As Fishman (1996) explains:
         The most important things the shuttle group does—carefully planning the
         software in advance, writing no code until the design is complete, making
         no changes without supporting blueprints, keeping a completely accurate
         record of the code—are not expensive. The process isn’t even rocket science.
         It’s standard practice in almost every engineering discipline except software
         engineering.


        BUG STORY 11
        Typing “reboot” Reboots Your Phone
        One of the ﬁrst releases of Google’s Android mobile phone operating system exhi-
        bited an unusual “root-console” problem. Google engineers had implemented a way to
        attach a remote device over the serial port, thus allowing to execute commands for
        diagnostic and debugging purposes. However, when there was no device attached, the
        phone would just use the built-in keyboard instead. Accidentally, this feature was left
        active in the production release.
           As a consequence,any text that people typed (entering a text message,or composing
        email,for instance) was also executed as shell commands with superuser privileges.The
        defect became apparent when one user exchanged text messages with his girlfriend.
        She asked him: “What did you do in the last minutes?” He replied “reboot”. Lo and
        behold, this command was interpreted and executed by the shell, effectively rebooting
        the phone, to the great astonishment of the user.
           The user was lucky. If he had typed, say “rm -rf .”, all of his data would have been
        erased. Fortunately, ordinary users rarely type this kind of thing. The Unix command
        “yes”, though, puts the computer into a busy loop, eating battery and memory—and
        that is a word users indeed type from time to time.
                                                          16.10 Further Reading          359




16.9 CONCEPTS
To learn from mistakes, use the problem database to check for frequently ﬁxed How To
    code and frequent types of errors.
To map defects to components, relate problems from the problem database to
    changes in the version archive.
To reduce the risk of errors in speciﬁcation, improve its quality assurance, increase
    its precision, and increase its automation.
To reduce the risk of errors in the code, do the same as for speciﬁcations; in addi-
    tion, reduce complexity, improve documentation, set up assertions, and improve
    training.
To reduce the risk of errors in quality assurance, improve your test suite; test early,
    test often; review your code; improve analysis tools; and calibrate coverage
    metrics.
To allocate quality-assurance resources wisely, focus on the components deter-
    mined as most defect prone in the past, and the components that are most
    similar to these.
The VULTURE tool predicts security vulnerabilities for a component, based on its
    set of imports.
The bug cache model retains components that are most defect prone because they
   are new, most frequently changed, most recently found to have a defect, or logi-
   cally coupled with another component that satisﬁes one of these criteria.
Recommendation systems like HATARI integrate mining and prediction right into
   the programming environment.
When detecting a correlation between product and/or process features, make sure
   it is a causation, too.



16.10 FURTHER READING
Mining version and problem archives to uncover defect patterns is a subject that
has recently received a lot of attention. Researchers are currently applying these
techniques to open-source version and problem archives. For up-to-date information,
see the working conference on mining software repositories (MSR). Several of
the papers and studies discussed in this chapter originated at this conference. For
a lightweight introduction to the ﬁeld, see the special edition of IEEE Software on
Mining Software Repositories (Nagappan et al., 2009) as well as the overview in
(Nagappan et al., 2008).
    At its core, mining software repositories is a subject of empirical software engi-
neering, an attempt to make software development more systematic by means of
360   CHAPTER 16 Learning from Mistakes



      empirical observations,laws,and theories.The book by Endres and Rombach (2003)
      is an excellent introduction to the subject, listing the most important empirical
      ﬁndings.
           Humphrey (1996) introduces the personal software process, a technique to
      measure and record what you do during software development—from lines of code
      produced per unit time to the time spent watching sports games. Of course, you
      also track any mistakes you make. By correlating these data, you ﬁnd out how to
      improve your personal development process.
          The Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement group at Microsoft
      Research is at the forefront of research when it comes to predicting software qual-
      ity. Have a look at its homepage at http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/projects/
      esm/.
          The article by Fishman (1996) on how the space shuttle software people write
      their software is a must-read for anyone who is interested in learning from mis-
      takes. It is available online at http://www.fastcompany.com/online/06/writestuff
      .html.



      EXERCISES
      The IBUGS repository at www.ibugs.org/ contains bug repositories extracted
      from project history. Each bug (enclosed in <bug>· · · </bug>), among other
      characteristics, lists the ﬁle(s) where the bug was ﬁxed, enclosed in
      <fixedFiles>· · · </fixedFiles>. Each <ﬁle> has a name attribute listing the ﬁle
      that was ﬁxed.
         A property name="severity" attribute lists the severity of the bug, from
      enhancement over minor, normal, and major to critical.

      16.1 Find the most defect-prone ﬁles. By parsing the ASPECTJ IBUGS repository,
           create a top-ﬁve list of the most defect-prone ﬁles in AspectJ—that is, those
           ﬁve ﬁles in which the most defects were ﬁxed. Ignore all enhancement bugs.
           Does Pareto’s law hold for AspectJ, too?
      16.2 Find the most defect-prone directories. Every ﬁle is part of a directory,which
           represents a higher-level component of a system. By parsing the IBUGS data,
           create a top-ﬁve list of the most defect-prone directories in AspectJ—that
           is, those directories in which the most defects were ﬁxed. Again, ignore all
           enhancement bugs.
                Note: Be sure to count every bug only once per directory. That is, a single
           bug of which the ﬁx affects foo/a.c and foo/b.c should be counted only
           once for foo/.
                                                        16.10 Further Reading      361



16.3 Hypothesize. In your own words, give an assessment of what makes these
     ﬁles or directories the most defect prone. Use the supplied source code and
     bug reports as additional information.




 Resolve then, that on this very ground,
 with small ﬂags waving and tinny blasts on tiny trumpets,
 we shall meet the enemy, and not only may he be ours,
 he may be us.
                                                       – WALTER CRAWFORD KELLY
                                                       The Pogo Papers (1953)


 Il faut imaginer Sysyphe heureux.
                                                               – ALBERT CAMUS
                                                   Le Mythe de Sysyphe (1942)
                                                                                     APPENDIX


Formal Deﬁnitions
                                                                                       A
A.1 DELTA DEBUGGING
A.1.1 Conﬁgurations
Deﬁnition A.1: Conﬁgurations and runs. We assume that the execution of a speciﬁc
program is determined by a number of circumstances. Denote the set of possible
conﬁgurations of circumstances by R.
Deﬁnition A.2: rtest. The function rtest : R → {, , } determines for a program run
r ∈ R whether some speciﬁc failure occurs () or not (), or whether the test is
unresolved ().
Deﬁnition A.3: Change. A change ␦ is a mapping ␦ : R → R. The set of changes C is the
set of all mappings from R → R (i.e., C ⫽ RR ). The relevant change between two runs
r1 , r2 ∈ R is a change ␦ ∈ C such that ␦(r1 ) ⫽ r2 .
Deﬁnition A.4: Composition       of changes. The change composition ◦ : C ⫻ C → C is
deﬁned as (␦i ◦ ␦j )(r) ⫽ ␦i ␦j (r) .

A.1.2 Passing and Failing Run
Axiom A.5: Passing and failing run. We assume two runs r , r ∈ R with rtest(r ) ⫽ 
and rtest(r ) ⫽ .
    In the following, we identify r and r by the changes applied to r .
Deﬁnition A.6: c . We deﬁne c ⊆ C as the empty set c ⫽ ∅, which identiﬁes r (no
changes applied).
Deﬁnition A.7: Failing conﬁguration. The set of all changes c ⊆ C is deﬁned as c ⫽
{␦1 , ␦2 , . . . , ␦n }, identifying r ⫽ (␦1 ◦ ␦2 ◦ · · · ◦ ␦n )(r ).

A.1.3 Tests
Deﬁnition A.8: test. The function test : 2c → {, , } is deﬁned        as follows: Let c ⊆ c
be a conﬁguration with c ⫽ {␦1 , ␦2 , . . . , ␦n }. Then, test(c) ⫽ rtest (␦1 ◦ ␦2 ◦ · · · ◦ ␦n )(r )
holds.
Corollary A.9: Passing and failing test case. The following holds:
                       test(c ) ⫽ test(∅) ⫽ rtest(r ) ⫽  and
                       test(c ) ⫽ test {␦1 , ␦2 , . . . , ␦n } ⫽ rtest(r ) ⫽                          363
364   APPENDIX Formal Deﬁnitions



      A.1.4 Minimality
      Deﬁnition A.10: n-minimal conﬁguration. A conﬁguration c ⊆ c is n-minimal if ᭙c  ⊂
      c · |c| ⫺ |c  | ⭐ n ⇒ (test(c  ) ⫽ ) holds.
      Deﬁnition A.11: Relevant conﬁguration. A conﬁguration is called relevant if it is
      1-minimal in the sense of Deﬁnition A.10. Consequently, c is relevant if ᭙␦i ∈ c ·
          
      test c \ {␦i } ⫽  holds.


      A.1.5 Simplifying
      Proposition A.12: ddmin minimizes. For any c ⊆ c , ddmin(c) returns a relevant con-
      ﬁguration in the sense of Deﬁnition A.11.
      Proof. According to the ddmin deﬁnition (List 5.2), ddmin(c ) returns c only if n ⭓ |c |
         and test(ⵜi ) ⫽  for all ⌬1 , . . . , ⌬n where ⵜi ⫽ c \ ⌬i . If n ⭓ |c |, then |⌬i | ⫽ 1 and |ⵜi | ⫽
         |c| ⫺ 1. Because all subsets of c  ⊂ c with |c | ⫺ |c  | ⫽ 1 are in {ⵜ1 , . . . , ⵜn } and test(ⵜi ) ⫽ 
         for all ⵜi , the condition of Deﬁnition A.10 applies and c is 1-minimal.                                     ■

      Proposition A.13: ddmin complexity, worst case. The number of tests carried out by
      ddmin(c ) is (|c |2 ⫹ 3|c |)/2 in the worst case.
      Proof. The worst case can be divided into two phases. First,every test has an unresolved result
         until we have a maximum granularity of n ⫽ |c |. Then, testing only the last complement
         results in a failure until n ⫽ 2 holds.
      ■   In the ﬁrst phase, every test has an unresolved result. This results in a reinvocation of
          ddmin with a doubled number of subsets, until |ci | ⫽ 1 holds. The number of tests t to be
          carried out is t ⫽ 2 ⫹ 4 ⫹ 8 ⫹ · · · ⫹ |c | ⫽ |c | ⫹ |c2 | ⫹ |c4 | ⫹ · · · ⫽ 2|c |.
      ■   In the second phase, the worst case is that testing the last set c \ {cn } fails. Consequently,
          ddmin is reinvoked with ddmin (c \ {cn }). This results in |c | ⫺ 1 calls of ddmin, with
          one test per call. The total number of tests t  is thus t  ⫽ (|c | ⫺ 1) ⫹ (|c | ⫺ 2) ⫹ · · · ⫹ 1 ⫽
          1 ⫹ 2 ⫹ 3 ⫹ · · · ⫹ (|c | ⫺ 1) ⫽ |c |(|c2 |⫺1) ⫽ |c | 2⫺|c | .
                                                                   2


      The overall number of tests is thus t ⫹ t  ⫽ 2|c | ⫹ (|c |2 ⫺ |c |)/2 ⫽ (|c |2 ⫹ 3|c |)/2.               ■

      Proposition A.14: ddmin complexity, best case. If there is only one failure-inducing
      change ␦i ∈ c and all conﬁgurations that include ␦i cause a failure as well, the number
      of tests t is limited by t ⭐ log2 (|c |).
      Proof. Under the given conditions, the test of either initial subset c1 or c2 will fail. n ⫽ 2
         always holds. Thus, the overall complexity is that of a binary search.                   ■


      A.1.6 Differences
      Deﬁnition A.15: n-minimal difference. Let c      and c  be two conﬁgurations with ∅ ⫽
                                                                
                                                  
      c ⊆ c ⊂ c ⊆ c . Their difference ⌬ ⫽ c \ c is n-minimal if
                                                 
                                                                                      
                      ᭙⌬i ⊂ ⌬ · |⌬i | ⭐ n ⇒ test(c  ∪ ⌬i ) ⫽  ∧ test(c \ ⌬i ) ⫽ 

      holds.
                                                                             A.2 Memory Graphs                365



Deﬁnition A.16: Relevant difference. A difference is called relevant if it is 1-minimal in
the sense of Deﬁnition A.15. Consequently, a difference ⌬ is 1-minimal if
                                                                 
                     ᭙␦i ∈ ⌬ · test c ∪ {␦i } ⫽  ∧ test c \ {␦i } ⫽ 
holds.

A.1.7 Isolating
Proposition A.17: dd minimizes. Given (c  , c  ) ⫽ dd(c , c ), the difference ⌬ ⫽ c  \ c 
                                                                                        
is 1-minimal in the sense of Deﬁnition A.15.
Proof. (compare proof of Proposition A.12): According to the dd deﬁnition (Figure 13.2),
           , c  , n) returns (c  , c  ) only if n ⭓ |⌬| where ⌬ ⫽ c  \ c  ⫽ ⌬ ∪ · · · ∪ ⌬ . That is,
   dd  (c                                                                      1         n
   |⌬i | ⫽ 1 and ⌬i ⫽ {␦i } hold for all i.
        Furthermore,for dd  to return (c      , c  ),the conditions test(c  ∪ ⌬ ) ⫽ ,test(c  \ ⌬ ) ⫽
                                                                                  i                 i
                                          
   , test(c ∪ ⌬i ) ⫽ , and test(c \ ⌬i ) ⫽  must hold.
        These are the conditions of Deﬁnition A.15. Consequently, ⌬ is 1-minimal.                         ■

Proposition A.18: dd complexity, worst case. The number of tests carried out by
dd(c , c ) is |⌬|2 ⫹ 7|⌬| in the worst case, where ⌬ ⫽ c \ c .
Proof. The worst case is the same as in Proposition A.13, but with a double number of tests.
                                                                                                        ■

Proposition A.19: dd complexity, best case. If all tests return either  or , the number
of tests t in dd is limited by t ⭐ log2 (|c \ c |).
Proof. We decompose ⌬ ⫽ ⌬1 ∪ ⌬2 ⫽ c \ c   . Under the given conditions, the test of c  ∪
                                                                                         
         
   ⌬1 ⫽ c \ ⌬2 will either pass or fail. n ⫽ 2 always holds. This is equivalent to a classi-
   cal binary search algorithm over a sorted array: with each recursion, the difference is
   reduced by 1/2; the overall complexity is the same.                                      ■
                                                                       , c  ) ⫽ dd(c , c ).
Corollary A.20: Size of failure-inducing difference, best case. Let (c               
                                                    
If all tests return either  or , then |⌬| ⫽ |c \ c | ⫽ 1 holds.
Proof. Follows directly from the equivalence to binary search, as shown in Proposition A.19.
                                                                                                        ■



A.2 MEMORY GRAPHS
A.2.1 Formal Structure
Let G ⫽ (V , E, root) be a memory graph containing a set V of vertices, a set E of
edges, and a dedicated vertex root (Figure A.1):
Vertices. Each vertex v ∈ V has the form v ⫽ (val, tp, addr), standing for a value
   val of type tp at memory address addr. As an example, the C declaration
         int i = 42;

    results in a vertex vi ⫽ (42, int, 0x1234), where 0x1234 is the (hypothetical)
    memory address of i.
366   APPENDIX Formal Deﬁnitions



                                  0. . *                       1
        Memory Graph                       Edge                                 Operation

                                                                   +apply(name:string=" "): string
                1                                  0. . *

                                               2
                                                     Vertex
                                  0. . * +value: string
                           root        1 +type: string
                                         +address: void *


      FIGURE A.1
      UML object model of memory graphs.



                                           f                   ().val
                            <Root>                   { ... }               47


      FIGURE A.2
      Edge construction.



      Edges. Each edge e ∈ E has the form e ⫽ (v1 , v2 , op),where v1 , v2 ∈ V are the related
        vertices. The operation op is used in constructing the expression of a vertex
        (see Figure A.2). As an example, the C declaration of the record (“struct”) f,

             struct foo { int val; } f = {47};

        results in two vertices vf ⫽ ({. . . }, struct foo, 0x5678) and vf .val ⫽ (47, int,
        0x5678), as well as an edge ef .val ⫽ (vf , vf .val , opf .val ) from vf to vf .val .
      Root. A memory graph contains a dedicated vertex root ∈ V that references all
        base variables of the program. Each vertex in the memory graph is accessible
        from the root. In the previous examples, i and f are base variables. Thus, the
        graph contains the edges ei ⫽ (root, vi , opi ) and ef ⫽ (root, vf , opf ).
      Operations. Edge operations construct the name of descendants from their par-
        ent’s name. In an edge e ⫽ (v1 , v2 , op), each operation op is a function that takes
        the expression of v1 to construct the expression of v2 . We denote functions by
        ␭x.B — a function that has a formal parameter x and a body B. In our examples,
        B is simply a string containing x. Applying the function returns B where x is
        replaced by the function argument.
            Operations on edges leading from root to base variables initially set the
        name. Thus, opi ⫽ ␭x."i" and opf ⫽ ␭x."f" hold.
            Deeper vertices are constructed based on the name of their parents. For
        instance, opf .val ⫽ ␭x."x .val" holds, meaning that to access the name of the
        descendant one must append ".val" to the name of its parent.
                                                                     A.2 Memory Graphs        367



      In our graph visualizations, the operation body is shown as edge label, with
  the formal parameter replaced by "()". That is, we use op("()") as label. This
  is reﬂected in the previous ﬁgure.
Names. The following function name constructs a name for a vertex v using the
  operations on the path from v to the root vertex. As there can be several parents
  (and thus several names), we nondeterministically choose a parent v of v along
  with the associated operation op.
                                             
                                  op name(v )     if ∃(v , v, op) ∈ E
                  name(v) ⫽
                                  ""               otherwise (root vertex)
      As an example, see how a name for vf .val is found: name(vf .val ) ⫽ opf .val
   (name(vf )) ⫽ opf .val (opf ("")) ⫽ opf .val ("f") ⫽ "f.val".

A.2.2 Unfolding Data Structures
To obtain a memory graph G ⫽ (V , E, root), as formalized in Section A.2.1, we use
the following scheme.

1. Let unfold( parent, op, G) be a procedure (sketched in the following) that takes
   the name of a parent expression parent and an operation op and unfolds the
   element op( parent), adding new edges and vertices to the memory graph G.
2. Initialize V ⫽ {root} and E ⫽ ∅.
3. For each base variable name in the program, invoke unfold(root, ␭x."name").
    The unfold procedure works as follows. Let (V , E, root) ⫽ G be the members of
G, let expr ⫽ op(parent) be the expression to unfold, let tp be the type of expr, and
let addr be its address. The unfolding then depends on the structure of expr.
Aliases. If V already has a vertex v at the same address and with the same type
   [formally, ∃v ⫽ (val  , tp , addr  ) ∈ V · tp ⫽ tp ∧ addr ⫽ addr  ], do not unfold
   expr again. However, insert an edge ( parent, v , op) in the existing vertex. As an
   example, consider the C statements:
        struct foo f; int *p1; int *p2; p1 = p2 = &f;
   If f has already been unfolded, we do not need to unfold its aliases *p1 and *p2.
   However, we insert edges from p1 and p2 to f.
Records. Otherwise, if expr is a record containing n members m1 , m2 , . . . , mn ,
   add a vertex v ⫽ ({. . . }, tp, addr) to V , and an edge (parent, v, op) to E. For
   each mi ∈ {m1 , m2 , . . . , mn }, invoke unfold(expr, ␭x."x.mi ", G), unfolding the
   record members.
        As an example, consider the “Edges” example shown in Figure A.2. Here, the
   record f is created as a vertex and its member f.val has been unfolded.
Arrays. Otherwise, if expr is an array containing n members m[0], m[1], . . . ,
   m[n ⫺ 1], add a vertex v ⫽ ([. . . ], tp, addr) to V , and an edge (parent, v, op)
368   APPENDIX Formal Deﬁnitions



                                              0x ...
                                       p1               *()

                                                 f
                             <Root>                            { ... }

                                       p2                *()
                                              0x ...


      FIGURE A.3
      Alias graph.

         to E. For each i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , n}, invoke unfold(expr, ␭x."x [i ]", G), unfolding
         the array elements. Arrays are handled very much like records, and thus no
         example is given.
      Pointers. Otherwise, if expr is a pointer with address value val, add a vertex
         v ⫽ (val, tp, addr) to V , and an edge ( parent, v, op) to E. Invoke unfold
         (expr, ␭x."*(x )", G), unfolding the element expr points to (assuming that ∗p
         is the dereferenced pointer p). In the previous “Aliases” example, we would end
         up with the graph shown in Figure A.3.
      Atomic values. Otherwise, expr contains an atomic value val. Add a vertex v ⫽
         (val, tp, addr) to V , and an edge (parent, v, op) to E. As an example, see f in
         the previous ﬁgure.

      A.2.3 Matching Vertices and Edges
      Let G ⫽ (V , E , root  ) and G ⫽ (V , E , root  ) be two memory graphs.

      Matching vertices. Two vertices v ∈ V and v ∈ V match (written v ↔ v ) if
         ■ both are not pointers, and have the same type, value, and size, or
         ■ both are pointers of the same type and are NULL, or
         ■ both are pointers of the same type and are non-NULL.

        Note that two pointers of the same type, but pointing to different addresses,
        match each other. This is exactly the point of memory graphs: to abstract from
        concrete addresses.
      Matching edges. Two edges e ⫽ (v , v  ) ∈ E and e ⫽ (v , v  ) ∈ E match,
        written e ↔ e if
        ■ the edge expressions are equal,
                    
        ■ v ↔ v , and
                  
        ■ v ↔ v — that is, the vertices match.



      A.2.4 Computing the Common Subgraph
      To compare two memory graphs G ⫽ (V , E , root  ) and G ⫽ (V , E , root  ),we
      use the following parallel traversal scheme.
                                                                           A.2 Memory Graphs   369



1. Initialize M ⫽ (root  , root  ).
2. For all (v , v ) ∈ M, determine the set of reachable matching vertices (v  , v  )
   with v  ∈ V , v  ∈ V such that
                
   ■ (v , v ) ∈ M
                
   ■ (v , v ) ∈ E (i.e., there is an edge from v to v )
                                                             
                                                          
   ■ (v , v ) ∈ E (i.e., there is an edge from v to v )
                                                                  
   ■ (v , v ) ↔ (v , v ) (i.e., the edges match, implying v ↔ v )
                                                            
   Set M :⫽ M ∪ (v , v ) for each matching pair (v , v ) so found.
3. Continue with step 2 until no further matching vertices can be found.

   The matching vertices in M form a common subgraph of G and G . All ver-
tices v ∈ V · (¬∃v · (v , v) ∈ M) and v ∈ V · (¬∃v · (v, v ) ∈ M) are nonmatching
vertices and thus form differences between G and G .
    Note that M as obtained by parallel traversal is not necessarily the largest
common subgraph. To obtain this, use the algorithm of Barrow and Burstall
(1976), starting from a correspondence graph as computed by the algorithm
of Bron and Kerbosch (1973).


A.2.5 Computing Graph Differences
We not only need a means of detecting differences in data structures but a means
of applying these differences. We shall ﬁrst concentrate on applying all differences
between r and r to r — that is, we compute debugger commands that change
the state of r such that eventually its memory graph is identical to G .
    For this purpose, we require three graph traversals. During these steps, G is
transformed to become equivalent to G and each graph operation is translated
into debugger commands that perform the equivalent operation on r .
   As an example, we consider the two memory graphs shown in Figure A.4, where
the dotted lines indicate the matching M between vertices, obtained from the com-
mon subgraph. (Actually, this matching cannot be obtained from parallel traversal,
as described in Section A.2.4, but would be obtained from the largest common
subgraph.) It is plain to see that element 15 in G has no match in G . Likewise,
element 20 in G has no match in G .


                G    list        ( ) –>next        ( ) –>next        ( ) –>next
                            14                18                20                22




                     list        ( ) –>next        ( ) –>next        ( ) –>next
                G           14                15                18                22


FIGURE A.4
Graph matchings.
370   APPENDIX Formal Deﬁnitions



      1. (Set and create variables). For each vertex v in G without a matching
         vertex in G , create a new vertex v as a copy of v . v is matched to v . After
         this step, each vertex v has a matching vertex v .
             Figure A.5 shows our example graphs after this step. To generate debugger
         commands, for each addition of a vertex v we identify the appropriate variable
         v in r and generate a command that
             ■ creates v in r if it does not exist yet, and
             ■ sets v to the value found in r .

         In our example, we would obtain the following GDB commands.
              set variable $m1 = (List *)malloc(sizeof(List))
              set variable $m1->value = 15
              set variable $m1->next = list->next

      2. (Adjust pointers). For each pointer vertex p in G , determine the matching
         vertex p in G .Let *p and *p be the vertices that p and p point to, respec-
         tively (reached via the outgoing edge). If *p does not exist, or if *p and *p
         do not match, adjust p such that it points to the matching vertex of *p .
             In our example, the next pointers from 14 to 18 and from 18 to 20 must be
         adjusted. The resulting graphs are shown in Figure A.6. Again, any adjustment
         translates into appropriate debugger commands.
      3. (Delete variables). Each remaining vertex v in G that is not matched
         in G must be deleted, including all incoming and outgoing edges. After this
         last step, G is equal to G .
             In our example, vertex 20 must be deleted. The resulting graphs are shown
         in Figure A.7.
             Such a deletion of a vertex v translates into debugger commands that set all
         pointers that point to v to null, such that v becomes unreachable. Additionally,
         one might want to free the associated dynamic memory.



                                                   15


                                                    ( ) –>next

                          list        ( ) –>next        ( ) –>next        ( ) –>next
                                 14                18                20                22




                          list        ( ) –>next        ( ) –>next        ( ) –>next
                                 14                15                18                22


      FIGURE A.5
      Creating new variables.
                                                                             A.2 Memory Graphs   371



                                               15

                             ( ) –>next         ( ) –>next ( ) –>next


                      list                                            ( ) –>next
                             14                18                20                22




                      list        ( ) –>next        ( ) –>next        ( ) –>next
                             14                15                18                22


FIGURE A.6
Adjusting pointers.



                                               15

                             ( ) –>next         ( ) –>next ( ) –>next


                      list
                             14                18                20                22




                      list        ( ) –>next        ( ) –>next        ( ) –>next
                             14                15                18                22


FIGURE A.7
Deleting variables.



    After these three steps, we have successfully transferred the changes in a data
structure from a run r to a run r .


A.2.6 Applying Partial State Changes
For the purpose of delta debugging, transferring all changes is not sufﬁcient. We
need to apply partial state changes as well. For this purpose,we associate a delta ␦v
with each vertex v in G or G that is not contained in the matching. If v is in G
only, applying ␦v is supposed to delete it from G . If v is in G only, applying ␦v
must add it to G .
    Let c be the set of all deltas so obtained. As always, c ⫽ ∅ holds. In Figure A.4,
for instance, we would obtain two deltas c ⫽ {␦15 , ␦20 }. The idea is that ␦15 is
supposed to add vertex 15 to G . ␦20 should delete vertex 20 from G . Applying
both ␦15 and ␦20 should change G to G .
372   APPENDIX Formal Deﬁnitions



         To apply a subset ⌬ ⊆ c \ c  only, we run the state transfer method of

      Section A.2.5, but with the following differences:
          ■      In steps 1 and 3 we generate or delete a vertex v only if ␦v is in ⌬.
          ■      In step 2 we adjust a pointer p with a matching p only if ␦*p is in ⌬ or ␦*p
                 is in ⌬.
         As an example, apply ⌬ ⫽ {␦15 } only. Step 1 generates the new vertex. Step 2
      adjusts the pointer from 14 such that it points to 15. However, the pointer from
      18 to 20 is not changed, because ␦20 is not in c. We obtain a graph (and appropriate
      GDB commands) where only element 15 has been inserted (Figure A.8).
         Likewise, if we apply ⌬ ⫽ {␦20 } only step 1 does not generate a new vertex.
      However, step 2 adjusts the pointer from 18 such that it points to 22, and step 3
      properly deletes element 20 from the graph.


      A.2.7 Capturing C State
      In the programming language C (and its sibling C++),pointer accesses and type con-
      versions are virtually unlimited, which makes extraction of data structures difﬁcult.
      The following are challenges and how one can deal with them.

      Invalid pointers. In C, uninitialized pointers can contain arbitrary addresses.
        A pointer referencing invalid or uninitialized memory can quickly introduce a
         lot of garbage into the memory graph.



                                                                                                     15


                                                                                                      ()–>next

          list          ()–>next        ()–>next        ()–>next              list        ()–>next        ()–>next          ()–>next
      G            14              18              20              22                14              18                20              22
                                                                        ␦15


          list          ()–>next        ()–>next        ()–>next              list        ()–>next        ()–>next          ()–>next
      G            14              15              18              22                14              15                18              22

                                        ␦20                                                                      ␦20
                                                                                                     15

                                              ()–>next                               ()–>next         ()–>next ()–>next


          list          ()–>next                                              list
                   14              18              20              22                14              18                20              22
                                                                        ␦15


          list          ()–>next        ()–>next        ()–>next              list        ()–>next        ()–>next          ()–>next
                   14              15              18              22                14              15                18              22


      FIGURE A.8
      Applying partial state changes.
                                                             A.2 Memory Graphs          373



      To distinguish valid from invalid pointers, we use a memory map. Using
   debugger information, we detect individual memory areas such as stack frames,
   heap areas requested via the malloc function,or static memory. A pointer is valid
   only if it points within a known area.
Dynamic arrays. In C, one can allocate arrays of arbitrary size on the heap via
  the malloc function. Although the base address of the array is typically stored
  in a pointer, C offers no means of ﬁnding out how many elements were actually
  allocated. Keeping track of the size is left to the discretion of the programmer
  (and can thus not be inferred by us).
      A similar case occurs when a C struct contains arrays that grow beyond its
  boundaries, as in
       struct foo {
           int num_elements;
           int array[1];
       }.

   Although array is declared to have only one element, it is actually used as a
   dynamic array, expanding beyond the struct boundaries. Such structs are allo-
   cated such that there is sufﬁcient space for both the struct and the desired
   number of array elements.
       To determine the size of a dynamic array, we again use the memory map as
   described earlier. An array cannot cross the boundaries of its memory area. For
   instance,if we know the array lies within a memory area of 1,000 bytes the array
   cannot be longer than 1,000 bytes.
Unions. The biggest obstacle in extracting data structures are C unions. Unions
  (also known as variant records) allow multiple types to be stored at the same
  memory address. Again, keeping track of the actual type is left to the discretion
  of the programmer. When extracting data structures, this information is not gen-
  erally available.
      To disambiguate unions, we employ a couple of heuristics, such as expand-
  ing the individual union members and checking which alternative contains
  the smallest number of invalid pointers. Another alternative is to search for a
  type tag — an enumeration type within the enclosing struct the value of which
  corresponds to the name of a union member. Although such heuristics mostly
  make good guesses, it is safer to provide explicit disambiguation rules — either
  handcrafted or inferred from the program.
Strings. A char array in C has several uses. It can be used for strings, but is also
   frequently used as placeholder for other objects. For instance, the malloc( )
   function returns a char array of the desired size. It may be used for strings, but
   also for other objects.
       Generally,we interpret char arrays as strings only if no other type claims the
   space. Thus, if we have both a char array pointer and pointer of another type
   both pointing to the same area, we use the second pointer for unfolding.
374   APPENDIX Formal Deﬁnitions



         In languages with managed memory such as JAVA or C#, none of these prob-
      lems exist, as the garbage collector must be able to resolve them at any time. Most
      languages are far less ambiguous when it comes to interpreting memory contents.
      In object-oriented languages, for instance, dynamic binding makes the concept of
      unions obsolete.



      A.3 CAUSE–EFFECT CHAINS
      A program run r is a sequence of states r ⫽ [s1 , s2 , . . . , sn ]. Each state si consists of
      at least a memory graph Gi as well as a backtrace bi —that is, si ⫽ (Gi , bi ).
          Let s be a program state from a failing run r . Let r be a passing run. Then,
      s ⫽ match(s ) is a matching state.

      Matching states. Two states s ⫽ (G , b ) and s ⫽ (G , b ) match if their back-
        traces are identical (b ⫽ b ). This implies that the set of local variables is equal.
        The function match : (r → r ∪ {⊥}) assigns each state s t ∈ r a matching state
        s t ∈ r , or ⊥, if no such match can be found.

         Individual state differences, as determined by delta debugging, can be compo-
      sed into a cause–effect chain.

      Relevant deltas. For each s t ∈ r , let a relevant delta ⌬t be a failure-
         inducing difference, as determined by delta debugging: let s t ⫽ match(s t ). If
         match(s t ) ⫽ ⊥ holds,then ⌬t ⫽ ⊥. Otherwise,let c t be the difference between
         s t and s t , and let c t ⫽ ∅. Let (c   , c  ) ⫽ dd(c , c ). Then, ⌬ ⫽ c  \ c  is
                                                      t t          t t          t   t    t
         a relevant delta.
      Cause – effect chains. A sequence of relevant deltas C ⫽ [⌬t1 , ⌬t2 , . . . ] with
         ti ⬍ ti⫹1 is called a cause–effect chain if each ⌬ti causes the subsequent
         ⌬ti⫹1 , ⌬ti⫹2 , . . . as well as the failure.
             Within a cause–effect chain, cause transitions occur as follows.
      Cause transitions. Let var(⌬t ) be the set of variables affected by a state differ-
         ence ⌬t . var(⊥) ⫽ ∅ holds.Then,two moments in time (t1 , t2 ) are called a cause
         transition if
         ■ t1 ⬍ t2 ,
         ■ a cause–effect chain C with [⌬t1 , ⌬t2 ] ⊆ C exists, and
         ■ var(⌬t1 ) ⫽ var(⌬t2 ).

        A cause transition is called direct if ¬∃t : t1 ⬍ t ⬍ t2 .

          To isolate direct cause transitions, we use a divide-and-conquer algorithm. The
      basic idea is to start with the interval (1, |r |), reﬂecting the ﬁrst and last state of r .
      If a cause transition has occurred, we examine the state at the middle of the interval
      and check whether the cause transition has occurred in the ﬁrst half and/or in the
      second half. This is continued until all cause transitions are narrowed down.
                                                                A.3 Cause–Effect Chains    375



Isolating cause transitions. For a given cause–effect chain C, the algorithm
   cts(t1 , t2 ) narrows down the cause transitions between the moments in time
   t1 and t2 :
                               ⎧
                               ⎨∅
                               ⎪                          if var(⌬t1 ) ⫽ var(⌬t2 )
                cts(t1 , t2 ) ⫽ cts(t1 , t) ∪ cts(t, t2 ) if ∃t : t1 ⬍ t ⬍ t2
                               ⎪
                               ⎩
                                 (t1 , t2 )               otherwise

   where [⌬t1 , ⌬t2 ] ⊆ C holds.

   Our actual implementation computes C (and in particular, ⌬t ) on demand. If
we isolate a ⌬t between ⌬t1 and ⌬t2 , but ﬁnd that ⌬t was not caused by ⌬t1 , we
recompute ⌬t1 such that the cause–effect chain property is preserved.




 We think in generalities, but we live in detail.
                                                                – ALFRED NORTH WHITEHEAD
                                                                            (1861–1947)
                                                                         GLOSSARY




This glossary gives deﬁnitions for important terms as used in this book. If multiple
deﬁnitions are given, deﬁnition 1 is the one as used in this book (deﬁnition 2 and
later are found in other places). References within the glossary always refer to
deﬁnition 1.



Accident An unplanned event or series of events resulting in death, injury, occupational
     illness, damage to or loss of data and equipment or property, or damage to the
     environment. Synonym of mishap.
Adaptive testing Executing a sequence of tests in which later tests depend on the outcome
    of earlier tests.
Algorithmic debugging An automated technique that narrows down an error by querying
     the correctness of intermediate results.
Anomaly A program behavior that deviates from expectations based on other runs or other
    programs. Also known as incident.

Backward slice The slice that may inﬂuence a speciﬁc statement.
Bug    1. Synonym of defect. 2. Synonym of failure. 3. Synonym of problem. 4. Synonym of
      infection.
Bug report    Synonym of problem report.

Cause An event preceding the effect without which the effect would not have occurred.
Cause–effect chain A sequence of events in which each event is a cause of the following
     event.
Change request     Synonym of problem report.
Circumstance An event or aspect that may affect the function of a system.
Code smell A program property likely to be a defect. See also Defect pattern.
Conﬁguration An arrangement of circumstances that affect the function of a system.
Correction A ﬁx to the code that removes a defect from the program. See also Debugging.
     Compare Workaround.
Correctness The degree to which software is free from errors in its speciﬁcation, design,
     and coding.
Crash The sudden and complete failure of a computer system or component.

Debuggee The program that is subject to debugging.
Debugger Tool to facilitate debugging.
Debugging 1. Relating a failure or an infection to a defect (via an infection chain) and
    subsequent ﬁxing of the defect. 2. Removing defects from software. See alsoValidation
    and Veriﬁcation.                                                                        377
378   Glossary



      Deduction Reasoning from the abstract to the concrete. See also Static analysis. Compare
          Induction.
      Defect An error in the program—especially one that can cause an infection and thus a
           failure. Also known as bug or fault. Compare Flaw.
      Defect pattern A pattern matching a code smell.
      Delta Difference between (or change to) conﬁgurations—especially code, states, or
           circumstances.
      Delta debugging An automatic technique that narrows down a cause by running auto-
           mated experiments.
      Diagnosis A theory that explains a failure.
      Dynamic analysis Runtime techniques for observing or inducing abstractions to the set
          of values or behaviors seen so far when executing a program. Compare Static analysis.

      Effect An event following the cause that would not have occurred without the cause.
      Error 1. An unwanted and unintended deviation from what is correct, right, or true. 2.
           Synonym of infection. 3. Synonym of mistake.
      Exception An event that causes suspension of normal program operation.
      Experiment A set of actions and observations, performed to verify or falsify a hypothesis.
      Experimental analysis A dynamic analysis in which program executions are initiated
          and/or conducted by the technique, typically within experiments.

      Failure An externally visible error in the program behavior. Also known as malfunction.
           See also Problem.
      Fallacy An error in logical argument that is independent of the truth of the premises.
      Fault   Synonym of defect.
      Feature An intended property or behavior of a program. Compare Problem.
      Fix A delta such that the failure in question no longer occurs. See also Correction and
          Workaround.
      Fixing The act of applying a ﬁx.
      Flaw A defect that cannot be attributed to some speciﬁc location within the program, but
          rather its overall design or architecture.
      Forward slice The slice that may be inﬂuenced by a speciﬁc statement.

      Hanging Waiting for an event that will never occur.
      Heisenbug A failure that is altered or disappears when one attempts to probe or isolate it.
      Hypothesis A proposed explanation for a phenomenon. See also Theory and Diagnosis.

      Incident    Synonym of anomaly.
      Induction    Reasoning from the concrete to the abstract. Compare Deduction.
      Inductive analysis A dynamic analysis technique that uses induction over multiple
           program executions to ﬁnd common abstractions.
      Infection An error in the program state—especially one that can cause a failure.
                                                                                  Glossary      379



Infection chain A cause–effect chain from defect to failure along infections.
Invariant A property that does not change under a set of transformations, such as loop
     iterations (for loop invariants) or method calls (for class invariants).
Issue   Synonym of problem.

Malfunction     Synonym of failure.
Mishap    Synonym of accident.
Mistake A human act or decision resulting in an error.

Observation Watching something and taking note of anything it does—for instance,
    observing a program run using a debugger.
Observational analysis A dynamic-analysis technique that observes a single program
    execution to gather ﬁndings.
Oracle A device that is able to decide any problem of a certain type—in particular,
     correctness.

Patch 1. Synonym of ﬁx. 2. A change made directly to an object program without reassem-
     bling or recompiling from the source program.
Problem A questionable property or behavior of a program. Also known as issue. See also
     Failure. Compare Feature.
Problem report The information required to reproduce a problem.

Regression testing Testing that functionality present in the past is still working in the
     present.

Scientiﬁc method A collection of processes that are considered characteristic for the
     acquisition of new scientiﬁc knowledge based on physical evidence.
Slice A subset of a program; either a forward slice or a backward slice.
Speciﬁcation A document that speciﬁes in a complete, precise, and veriﬁable manner the
     behavior and other characteristics of a program.
Static analysis Compile-time techniques for deducing safe and computable approxima-
      tions to the set of values or behaviors arising dynamically at runtime when executing
      a program. Compare Dynamic analysis.
Surprise A property or behavior of a program that cannot be classiﬁed as feature or
     problem, due to the lack of speciﬁcation.

Test case A documentation specifying inputs, predicted results, and a set of execution
      circumstances for a program.
Testing The execution of a program with the intent to produce some problem—especially
     a failure. In the context of debugging, testing is typically intended to produce a given
     problem.
Theory A hypothesis offering valid predictions that can be observed.

Validation Producing evidence that the program meets its speciﬁcation for a speciﬁc
     intended use. In other words,“You built the right thing.” Compare Veriﬁcation.
380   Glossary



      Veriﬁcation Proving the absence of defects with regard to a speciﬁcation. In other words,
           “You built it right.” Compare Validation.

      Workaround A ﬁx to the code where the defect remains in the program. Compare
          Correction.




       “And hast thou slain the Jabberwock?
       Come to my arms, my beamish boy!
       O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!”
       He chortled in his joy.
                                                                          – LEWIS CARROLL
                                                        Through the Looking-Glass (1872)
                                                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY




Agrawal, H., and Horgan, J.R. (1990). “Dynamic Program Slicing,” in Proceedings of the ACM
  SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, 25(6),
  ACM SIGPLAN Notices, pp. 246–256,White Plains, NY.
Aho, A.V., Sethi, R., and Ullman, J.D. (1986). Compilers—Principles, Techniques and Tools,
  Addison-Wesley.
Ammons, G., Bodik, R., and Larus, J.R. (2002). “Mining Speciﬁcations,” in Proceedings of
  the ACM SIGPLAN/SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages,
  Portland, OR.
Artzi, S., Kim, S., and Ernst, M.D. (2008). “ReCrash: Making Software Failures Reproducible by
  Preserving Object States,”in Proceesings of ECOOP 2008, Object-Oriented Programming,
  22nd European Conference, Paphos, Cyprus.
Barnett, M., DeLine, R., Fähndrich, M., Leino, K.R.M., and Schulte, W. (2004). “Veriﬁcation
  of Object-Oriented Programs with Invariants,” Journal of Object Technology 3(6):27–56.
  Special Issue: ECOOP 2003 Workshop on Formal Techniques for Java-like Programs.
Barron, C.A. (2002). “High Tech’s Missionaries of Sloppiness,” Salon Magazine, December
  2000.
Barrow, H.G., and Burstall, R.M. (1976). “Subgraph Isomorphism, Matching Relational Struc-
  tures and Maximal Cliques,” Information Processing Letters 4(4):83–84.
Beizer, B. (1990). Software Testing Techniques. International Thomson Computer Press.
Beizer, B. (1999). “Unbanning the ‘Bug.’” Posting 79q48l$ncc$1@ﬁr.prod.itd.earthlink.net
  to comp.software.testing.
Beizer, B. (2000). “Deﬁnition of the Word Bug.” Posting 8kcV4.4008$S31.103769
  @newsread2.prod.itd.earthlink.net to comp.software.testing.
Beveridge,W.I.B. (1957). The Art of Scientiﬁc Investigation, 3rd ed.,Vintage Books.
Binkley, D., and Harman, M. (2003). “A Large-Scale Empirical Study of Forward and Backward
  Static Slice Size and Context Sensitivity,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
  on Software Maintenance, IEEE Computer Society.
Bloch, A., ed. (1980). Murphy’s Law Book Two: More Reasons Why Things Go Wrong!
  Price/Stern/Sloan Publishers.
Booch, G. (1994). Object-Oriented Analysis and Design, 2nd ed., Addison-Wesley.
Bron, C., and Kerbosch, J. (1973). “Algorithm 457—Finding All Cliques of an Undirected
  Graph,” Communications of the ACM 16(9):575–577.
Brun,Y.,and Ernst,M. (2004).“Finding Latent Code Errors Via Machine Learning over Program
  Executions,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering,
  pp. 480–490, Edinburgh.
                                                                                                 381
382   Bibliography



      Burdy, L., Cheon,Y., Cok, D., Ernst, M., Kiniry, J., Leavens, G.T., Leino, K.R.M., and Poll, E. (2003).
        “An Overview of JML Tools and Applications,” in Proceedings of the Eighth International
        Workshop on Formal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems, Trondheim, Norway.
      Buschmann, F., Meunier, R., Rohnert, H., Sommerlad, P., and Stal, M. (1996). Pattern-Oriented
        Software Architecture: A System of Patterns, volume 1, Pattern-Oriented Software
        Architecture, John Wiley & Sons.
      Chaki, S., Groce, A., and Strichman, O. (2004). “Explaining Abstract Counterexamples,” in
        Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of
        Software Engineering, pp. 73–82, Newport Beach, CA.
      Chelf, B. (2004). “Squashing Bugs at the Source,” Linux Magazine 55:16–20.
      Choi, J.-D., and Srinivasan, H. (1998). “Deterministic Replay of Java Multithreaded Applica-
        tions,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGMETRICS Symposium on Parallel and Distributed
        Tools, pp. 48–59.
      Choi, J.-D., and Zeller, A. (2002). “Isolating Failure-Inducing Thread Schedules,” in Proceed-
        ings of the International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, pp. 201–220,
        Rome.
      Cleve, H., and Zeller, A. (2005). “Locating Causes of Program Failures,” in Proceedings of the
        International Conference on Software Engineering, St. Louis, MO.
      Cohn, R., and Muth, R. (2004). Pin 2.0 User Guide. Available at: http://rogue.colorado.
        edu/Pin/documentation.php.
      Condit, J., Harren, M., McPeak, S., Necula, G.C., and Weimer, W. (2003). “Cured in the Real
       World,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language
        Design and Implementation, pp. 232–244, San Diego.
      Dallmeier, V., Lindig, C., and Zeller, A. (2005). “Lightweight Defect Localization for Java,”
        in Proceedings of the 19th European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming,
        Glasgow.
      DeMillo, R.A., Pan, H., and Spafford, E.H. (1996). “Critical Slicing for Software Fault Localiza-
        tion,” in Proceedings of the International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis,
        pp. 121–134.
      Demsky, B., and Rinard, M. (2003). “Automatic Detection and Repair of Errors in Data Struc-
        tures,” in Proceedings of the 18th Annual ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented
        Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, pp. 78–95, Anaheim, CA.
      Dickinson,W., Leon, D., and Podgurski,A. (2001). “Finding Failures by Cluster Analysis of Exe-
        cution Proﬁles,”in Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering,
        pp. 339–348, Toronto.
      Dijkstra, E.W. (1972). “Notes on Structured Programming,” in Dahl, O.-J., Dijkstra, E.W., and
        Hoare, C.A.R., eds., Structured Programming, pp. 1–82, Academic Press.
      Dijkstra, E.W. (1982). “On Webster, Users, Bugs, and Aristotle,” in Selected Writings on
        Computing: A Personal Perspective, pp. 288–291, Springer-Verlag. (Originally published
        as EWD 618 in 1977.)
      Dijkstra,E.W. (1989).“On the Cruelty of ReallyTeaching Computer Science,”Communications
        of the ACM 32(12):1398–1404.
                                                                             Bibliography       383



Ducassé, M. (1999). “Coca: An Automated Debugger for C,” in Proceedings of the Interna-
  tional Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 504–513, Los Angeles.
Dunlap,G.W.,King,S.T.,Cinar,S.,Basrai,M.A.,and Chen,P.M. (2002).“Revirt:Enabling Intrusion
 Analysis through Virtual-Machine Logging and Replay,” in Proceedings of the Symposium
  on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, Boston.
Dustin, E., Rashka, J., and Paul, J. (2001). Automated Software Testing: Introduction,
  Management, and Performance, Addison-Wesley.
Eisenstadt, M. (1997). “My Hairiest Bug War Stories,” Communications of the ACM 40(4):
   30–37.
Endres, A., and Rombach, D. (2003). A Handbook of Software and Systems Engineering,
  Pearson/Addison-Wesley.
Ernst, M.D., Cockrell, J., Griswold, W.G., and Notkin, D. (2001). “Dynamically Discovering
  Likely Program Invariants to Support Program Evolution,” IEEE Transactions on Software
  Engineering 27(2):1–25.
ESEC/FSE 99 (1999). Proceedings of ESEC/FSE’99—7th European Software Engineering
  Conference/7th ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering,
  volume 1687, Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Toulouse, France.
Fewster, M., and Graham, D. (1998). Software Test Automation, Addison-Wesley.
Fishman, C. (1996). “They Write the Right Stuff,” Fast Company Magazine 6.
Fritzson, P., Shahmehri, N., Kamkar, M., and Gyimothy, T. (1992). “Generalized Algorithmic
  Debugging and Testing,” ACM Letters on Programming Languages and Systems 1(4):
  303–322.
Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R., and Vlissides, J. (1994). Design Patterns: Elements of
  Reusable Object-Oriented Software, Addison-Wesley.
Geiger, L., and Zündorf, A. (2002). “Graph-Based Debugging with Fujaba,” in Workshop on
  Graph Based Tools, International Conference on Graph Transformations, Barcelona.
Gould, J.D. (1975). “Some Psychological Evidence on How People Debug Computer
  Programs,” International Journal of Man-Machine Studies 7:151–182.
Graves, T.L., Karr, A.F., Marron, J.S., and Siy, H. (2000). “Predicting Fault Incidence Using
  Software Change History,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 26(7):653–661.
Groce, A., and Visser, W. (2003). “What Went Wrong: Explaining Counterexamples,” in
  Proceedings of the SPIN Workshop on Model Checking of Software, pp. 121–135,
  Portland, OR.
Gyimóthy, T., Beszédes, Á., and Forgács, I. (1999). “An Efﬁcient Relevant Slicing Method for
  Debugging,” in ESEC/FSE’ 99, pp. 303–321.
Hailpern, B., and Santhanam, P. (2002). “Software Debugging, Testing, and Veriﬁcation,” IBM
  Systems Journal 41(1):4–12.
Hangal, S., and Lam, M.S. (2002). “Tracking Down Software Bugs Using Automatic Anomaly
  Detection,” in ICSE-2002, pp. 291–302.
Hopper, G.M. (1981). “The First Bug,” Annals of the History of Computing 3(3):
  285–286.
384   Bibliography



      Hovemeyer, D., and Pugh,W. (2004). “Finding Bugs Is Easy,” in Proceedings of the Conference
        on Object-Oriented Programming Systems Languages and Applications, pp. 132–136,
       Vancouver, BC.
      Hume, D. (1748). An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, A. Millar.
      Humphrey, W.S. (1996). Introduction to the Personal Software Process,Addison-Wesley.
      Humphrey, W.S. (1999). “Bugs or Defects?” Technical Report, Volume 2, Issue 1. Carnegie
        Mellon Software Engineering Institute.
      ICSE (2002). Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering,
        Orlando, FL.
      Jacky, J. (1996). The Way of Z: Practical Programming with Formal Methods, Cambridge
         University Press.
      Jim, T., Morrisett, J.G., Grossman, D., Hicks, M.W., Cheney, J., and Wang, Y. (2002). “Cyclone:
        A Safe Dialect of C,” in Proceedings of the General Track: 2002 USENIX Annual Technical
        Conference, pp. 275–288.
      Jones, J.A., Harrold, M.J., and Stasko, J. (2002). “Visualization of Test Information to Assist Fault
        Localization,” in ICSE 2002, pp. 467–477.
      Kaner, C., Falk, J., and Nguyen, H.Q. (1999). Testing Computer Software, John Wiley & Sons.
      Kernighan, B.W., and Pike, R. (1999). The Practice of Programming, Addison-Wesley.
      Kiczales, G., Hilsdale, E., Hugunin, J., Kersten, M., Palm, J., and Griswold, W.G. (2001). “An
        Overview of AspectJ,” in Proceedings of the 15th European Conference on Object-
        Oriented Programming, pp. 327–353, Budapest.
      Kidder, T. (1981). The Soul of a New Machine. New York: Atlantic Monthly Press.
      Kim, S., Zimmermann, T., Whitehead Jr., E.J., and Zeller, A. (2007). “Predicting Faults from
        Cached History,” in Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Software
        Engineering, pp. 489–498,Washington, DC.
      Knight, J.C., and Leveson, N.G. (1986). “An Experimental Evaluation of the Assumption
        of Independence in Multiversion Programming,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engi-
        neering 12(1):96–109.
      Ko, A.J., and Myers, B.A. (2004). “Designing the Whyline: A Debugging Interface for Asking
        Questions about Program Behavior,” in CHI ’04: Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on
        Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 151–158,Vienna.
      Ko,A.J., and Myers, B.A. (2005). “A Framework and Methodology for Studying the Causes of
        Software Errors in Programming Systems,” Journal of Visual Languages and Computing
        16(1–2):41–84.
      Ko, A. J., and Myers, B.A. (2008). “Debugging Reinvented: Asking and Answering Why and
       Why Not Questions about Program Behavior,” in Proceedings of the 30th International
        Conference on Software Engineering, Leipzig, Germany.
      Ko, A. J., and Myers, B.A. (2009). “Finding Causes of Program Output with the Java Why-
        line,” in Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
        Boston.
                                                                                Bibliography       385



Kolawa, A. (2002). “Using Bug-Tracking Systems as Idea Repositories.” Available at: www.
  stickyminds.com.
Konuru, R., Srinivasan, H., and Choi, J.-D. (2000). “Deterministic Replay of Distributed Java
 Applications,” in Proceedings of the International Parallel and Distributed Processing
  Symposium, Cancun.
Korel, B., and Laski, J. (1990). “Dynamic Slicing of Computer Programs,” The Journal of
  Systems and Software 13(3):187–195.
Larman, C. (2002). Applying UML and Patterns, Prentice Hall.
Leavens, G.T., Baker, A.L., and Ruby, C. (1999). “JML: A Notation for Detailed Design,” in
  Behavioral Speciﬁcations of Businesses and Systems, pp. 175–188, Kluwer Academic
  Publishers.
Leavens, G.T., and Cheon,Y. (2004). “Design by Contract with JML,”Technical Report, Iowa
  State University. Available at: http://www.jmlspecs.org/ .
Leitner, A., Ciupa, I., Oriol, M., Meyer, B., and Fiva, A. (2007) “Contract Driven Development =
  Test Driven Development–Writing Test Cases,”in Proceedings of the the 6th Joint Meeting
  of the European Software Engineering Conference and the ACM SIGSOFT Symposium
  on the Foundations of Software Engineering, Dubrovnik, Croatia.
Lencevicius, R. (2000). Advanced Debugging Methods, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Leveson, N.G., Cha, S.S., Knight, J.C., and Shimeall, T.J. (1990). “The Use of Self-Checks and
  Voting in Software Error Detection: An Empirical Study,” IEEE Transactions on Software
  Engineering 16(4):432–443.
Lewis, B. (2003). “Debugging Backward in Time,” in Ronsse, M., ed., Proceedings of
  the Fifth International Workshop on Automated and Algorithmic Debugging, Ghent,
  Belgium.
Lewis, D. (1973).“Causation,” Journal of Philosophy 70:556–567. Reprinted in Lewis (1986).
Lewis, D. (1986). Philosophical Papers:Volume II, Oxford University Press.
Liblit, B., Aiken, A., Zheng, A.X., and Jordan, M.I. (2003). “Bug Isolation Via Remote Program
  Sampling,”in Proceedings of the SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design
  and Implementation, San Diego.
Liblit, B., Naik, M., Zheng, A.X., Aiken, A., and Jordan, M.I. (2005). “Scalable Statistical Bug
  Isolation,”in Proceedings of the SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design
  and Implementation, Chicago.
Martin, R.C. (1996). “The Dependency Inversion Principle,” C++ Report, May 8, 1996.
McConnell, S.C. (1993). Code Complete: A Practical Handbook of Software Construction,
 Microsoft Press.
Meyer, B. (1997). Object-Oriented Software Construction, 2nd ed., Prentice-Hall.
Miller, B.P., Fredrikson, L., and So, B. (1990). “An Empirical Study of the Reliability of UNIX
  Utilities,” Communications of the ACM 33(12):32–44.
Mirrer, B. (2000). “Organize Your Problem Tracking System,” Software Testing & Quality
  Engineering Magazine 2(5).
386   Bibliography



      Mockus, A., and Votta, L. G. (2000). “Identifying Reasons for Software Changes Using Historic
       Databases,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Maintenance,
       pp. 120–130, San Jose.
      Mockus, A., and Weiss, D.M. (2000). “Predicting Risk of Software Changes,” Bell Labs Techni-
       cal Journal 5(2):169–180.
      Morgenstern, C. (1964). “The Impossible Fact,” in Knight, M., ed., The Gallows Songs.
       University of California Press. (Original poem published in 1905.)
      Muchnik, S.S. (1997). Advanced Compiler Design and Implementation, Morgan Kaufmann.
      Müller, M.M., Typke, R., and Hagner, O. (2002). “Two Controlled Experiments Concerning
       the Usefulness of Assertions as a Means for Programming,” in Proceedings of the 18th
       International Conference on Software Maintenance, pp. 84–92, San Jose.
      Myers, G.J. (1979). The Art of Software Testing, John Wiley & Sons.
      Nagappan, N., and Ball, T. (2005). “Use of Relative Code Churn Measures to Predict Sys-
        tem Defect Density,” in Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Software
        Engineering, St. Louis, MO.
      Nagappan, N., Ball, T., and Zeller, A. (2006). “Mining Metrics to Predict Component
        Failures,” in Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Software Engineering,
        pp. 452–461, Shong Hai.
      Nagappan, N., Zeller, A., and Zimmermann, T. (2008). “Predicting Bugs from History,” in Tom
        Mens and Serge Demeyer, eds., Software Evolution, pp. 69–88, Springer.
      Nagappan, N., Zeller, A., and Zimmermann, T., eds. (2009). IEEE Software—Special Issue on
        Mining Software Repositories, January.
      Naish, L. (1997). “A Declarative Debugging Scheme,” The Journal of Functional and Logic
        Programming 3.
      Necula, G.C., McPeak, S., and Weimer, W. (2002). “Cured: Type-Safe Retroﬁtting of Legacy
        Code,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of
        Programming Languages, pp. 128–139, Portland, OR.
      Ness, B., and Ngo, V. (1997). “Regression Containment through Source Code Isolation,”
        in Proceedings of the 21st Annual International Computer Software & Applications
        Conference, pp. 616–621,Washington, DC.
      Nethercote, N. (2004). “Dynamic Binary Analysis and Instrumentation,” Ph.D. Thesis, Univer-
        sity of Cambridge, UK.
      Nethercote, N., and Seward, J. (2003). “Valgrind: A Program Supervision Framework,”
        Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 89(2).
      Neuburg, M. (2003). AppleScript: The Deﬁnitive Guide, O’Reilly.
      Neuhaus, S., Zimmermann, T., Holler, C., and Zeller, A. (2007). “Predicting Vulnerable Soft-
        ware Components,” in Proceedings of the 14th ACM Conference on Computer and
        Communications Security, Alexandria,VA.
      Ogawa, M. (2007). “Visualizing the Eclipse Bug Data.” Available at: http://vis.cs.ucdavis.
       edu/ogawa/eclipse/.
                                                                                Bibliography       387



Orso, A., Apiwattanapong, T., and Harrold, M.J. (2003). “Leveraging Field Data for Impact
 Analysis and Regression Testing,” in Proceedings of the 9th European Software Engi-
  neering Conference Held Jointly with 11th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on
  Foundations of Software Engineering, pp. 128–137.
Ostrand, T., and Weyuker, E. (2002). “The Distribution of Faults in a Large Industrial Software
  System,” in Frankl, P.G., ed., Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium
  on Software Testing and Analysis,Volume 27(4), Software Engineering Notes, pp. 55–64.
Ostrand, T. J., Weyuker, E.J., and Bell, R.M. (2004). “Where the Bugs Are,” in Proceedings
  of the ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis,
  pp. 86–96.
Ottenstein, K.J., and Ottenstein, L.M. (1984). “The Program Dependence Graph in a Software
  Development Environment,”in Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT/SIGPLAN Software Engi-
  neering Symposium on Practical Software Development Environments,Volume 19, ACM
  SIGPLAN Notices, pp. 177–184.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference, Cambridge University Press.
Pezzè, M., and Young, M. (2005). Software Testing and Analysis: Process, Principles, and
  Techniques, John Wiley & Sons.
Pirsig, R.M. (1974). Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance,William Morrow.
Podgurski, A., Leon, D., Francis, P., Masri, W., Minch, M., Sun, J., and Wang, B. (2003). “Auto-
  mated Support for Classifying Software Failure Reports,” in Proceedings of the 25th
  International Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 465–475, Portland, OR.
Popper, K. (1959). The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery, Hutchinson. (Translation of Logik der
  Forschung,Vienna, 1935.)
Purushothaman, R., and Perry, D.E. (2004). “Towards Understanding the Rhetoric of Small
  Changes,” in Proceedings of the International Workshop on Mining Software Reposi-
  tories, pp. 90–94, Edinburgh.
Raymond, E.S., ed. (1996). New Hacker’s Dictionary, 3rd ed., MIT Press. See also http://
  www.jargon.org/.
Renieris, M., and Reiss, S.P. (2003). “Fault Localization with Nearest Neighbor Queries,” in
  Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Automated Software Engineering,
  Montreal.
Ronsse, M., Bosschere, K.D., Christiaens, M., de Kergommeaux, J.C., and Kranzlmüller, D.
  (2003). “Record/Replay for Nondeterministic Program Executions,” Communications of
  the ACM 46(9):62–67.
Rosenberg, J.B. (1996). How Debuggers Work—Algorithms, Data Structures, and Architec-
  ture, John Wiley & Sons.
RTI (2002). “The Economic Impacts of Inadequate Infrastructure for Software Testing,”
 Technical Report, Planning Report 02-3, National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Saff, D., and Ernst, M. (2004a). “Automatic Mock Object Creation for Test Factoring,” in
  Flanagan, C. and Zeller, A., eds., Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN/SIGSOFT Workshop
  on Program Analysis for Software Tools and Engineering,Washington, DC.
388   Bibliography



      Saff, D., and Ernst, M. (2004b). “An Experimental Evaluation of Continuous Testing During
        Development,” in Proceedings of the International Symposium on Software Testing and
        Analysis, pp. 76–85, Boston.
      Schmidt, D.C., Stal, M., Rohnert, H., and Buschmann, F. (2000). Pattern-Oriented Software
        Architecture:Patterns for Concurrent and Networked Objects,Volume 2,Pattern-Oriented
        Software Architecture, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
      Shapiro, E.Y. (1982). “Algorithmic Program Debugging,” Ph.D. Thesis, MIT Press, ACM
        Distinguished Dissertation.
      Shapiro, F.R. (1994). “Exposing the Myth Behind the First Bug Reveals a Few Tales,” BYTE.
      Shore, J. (2004). “Fail Fast,” IEEE Software 21(5):21–25.
      Śliwerski, J., Zimmermann, T., and Zeller, A. (2005a). “When Do Changes Induce Fixes?” in
          Proceedings of the Workshop on Mining Software Repositories, St. Louis, MO.
      Śliwerski, J., Zimmermann, T., and Zeller, A. (2005b). “HATARI: Raising Risk Awareness,” in
          Proceedings of the 10th European Software Engineering Conference Held Jointly with
          13th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering,
          Lisbon.
      Sommerville, I. (2001). Software Engineering, 6th ed., Addison-Wesley.
      Sosic̆, R., and Abramson, D. (1997). “Guard: A Relative Debugger,” Software—Practice and
        Experience 27(2):185–106.
      Stallman, R.M., and Pesch, R.H. (1994). Debugging with GDB, 4th ed., Free Software
        Foundation; distributed with GDB 4.13.
      Tip,F. (1995).“A Survey of Program SlicingTechniques,”Journal of Programming Languages
        3(3):121–189.
      Viega, J., and McGraw, G. (2001). Building Secure Software, Addison-Wesley.
      Voas, J.M. (1992). “PIE:A Dynamic Failure-based Technique,” IEEE Transactions on Software
        Engineering 18(8):717–727.
      Wahbe,R. (1992).“Efﬁcient Data Breakpoints,”in Proceedings of the Fifth International Con-
        ference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
        pp. 200–212.
      Wattenberg, M. (1998). “Map of the Market.”Available at: http://www.bewitched.com/ .
      Weinberg, G.M. (1971). The Psychology of Computer Programming,Van Nostrand Reinhold.
      Weiser, M. (1982). “Programmers Use Slices When Debugging,” Communications of the ACM
        25(7):446–452.
      Weiser, M. (1984). “Program Slicing,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 10(4):
        352–357.
      Whalley, D.B. (1994). “Automatic Isolation of Compiler Errors,” ACM Transactions on
       Programming Languages and Systems 16(5):1648–1659.
      Wilson, E.B. (1952). An Introduction to Scientiﬁc Research, McGraw-Hill.
                                                                                Bibliography       389



Xie,Y., and Engler, D. (2002). “Using Redundancies to Find Errors,”in Proceedings of the 10th
  ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering, pp. 51–60.
Zachary, G.P. (1994). Showstopper!: The Breakneck Race to Create Windows NT and the
  Next Generation at Microsoft, Free Press.
Zalta, E.N., ed. (2002). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford University. Available
  at: http://plato.stanford.edu/.
Zeller, A. (1999). “Yesterday, My Program Worked. Today, It Does Not. Why?” in ESEC/FSE 99,
  pp. 253–267.
Zeller, A. (2000). Debugging with DDD, Version 3.2, Universität Passau and Free Software
  Foundation; distributed with GNU DDD.
Zeller, A. (2002).“Isolating Cause–Effect Chains from Computer Programs,”in Griswold,W. G.,
  ed., Proceedings of the Tenth ACM SIGSOFT Symposium on the Foundations of Software
  Engineering, pp. 1–10, Charleston, SC.
Zeller, A., and Hildebrandt, R. (2002). “Simplifying and Isolating Failure-Inducing Input,” IEEE
  Transactions on Software Engineering 28(2):183–200.
Zeller, A., and Lütkehaus, D. (1996). “DDD—A Free Graphical Front-end for UNIX Debuggers,”
  SIGPLAN Notices 31(1):22–27.
Zhang, X., and Gupta, R. (2004). “Cost-Effective Dynamic Program Slicing,” in Proceed-
  ings of the 2004 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
  Implementation (PLDI), pp. 94–106,Washington, DC.
Zimmermann, T., and Nagappan, N. (2008). “Predicting Defects Using Network Analysis on
  Dependency Graphs,” in Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Software
  Engineering, pp.531–540, Leipzig, Germany.
Zimmermann, T., Premraj, R., and Zeller, A. (2007). “Predicting Defects for ECLIPSE,” in
  Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on Predictor Models in Software
  Engineering, p. 9, Minneupolis, MN.
Zimmermann, T.,and Zeller, A. (2002).“Visualizing Memory Graphs,”in Diehl,S.,ed., Proceed-
  ings of the International Dagstuhl Seminar on Software Visualization, Volume 2269,
  Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 191–204, Dagstuhl, Germany.
