

===== FILE: EPUB/back-matter-001-glossary.xhtml =====

1

 
Glossary

 

 

 Anthropology 
Anthropology is the scientific study of human behaviour, biology, societies, cultures and languages.
 Antiquity 
Antiquity is the ancient past. We usually use this term to refer to the Classical period in Western culture (and other cultures from around this time) before the Middle Ages.
 Buffering 
Buffering in digital video means preloading some of the video data before playing it – common in streaming video from the Internet.
 Chimera 
In Greek mythology, a fire-breathing female monster with a lion's head, a goat's body, and a serpent's tail.
 Chroma 
Chroma is the absolute colour of the object irrespective of its relative appearance - it's the attributes we see as belonging to the object itself. "For an object to have high chroma it must reflect/ transmit saturated light in relatively large amounts."[1]
 Cognitive science 
Cognitive science is the study of how the mind works, functions, and behaves. It includes aspects of psychology, linguistics, philosophy, neuroscience and artificial intelligence.
 Colorimetry 
Colorimetry is the science of measuring colour.  It involves methods of identifying light wavelengths and ascribing a numerical system to represent those wavelengths.
 Cones 
Cones are cells in the eye's retina that respond to high-intensity light and enable us to see high-resolution, coloured images. Humans have three types of cone cells, but other animals may have two, four or other numbers of cone cell types.
 Dichromacy 
Dichromacy (di means two) is where only two types of cone cells exist in the eye retinal area. Dichromats may not perceive parts of the visible spectrum that trichromats (three types of cones) or tetrachromats (four types of cones) can see.
 Dyestuff 
A dyestuff is a substance that can be used as a dye or from which a dye can be made. For example, a block of indigo dye can be called a dyestuff, as can a bundle of indigo leaves.
 Electromagnetic radiation 
Electromagnetic radiation is made from waves of the electromagnetic field. It includes radio waves, microwaves, infrared, light (including the visible spectrum), ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays.
 Filter (colour) 
A colour filter in traditional photography would be some kind of transparent glass or plastic that would absorb certain colours of light and change the image that is captured. In digital media, a colour filter is usually a file that has information that when applied to a digital image, can adjust the colour properties such as change the saturation of certain colours, change the lightness and contrast, etc. 
 Gamut (colour) 
Colour gamut (also known as colour space) is the complete range or subset of colour that can be produced or recorded by an application, system or device.
 Hue 
Hue is the term that we use to classify colour. For example if we describe something as "red" or "magenta" or "greenish-yellow", that is the hue. In physics, a specific wavelength of light is a hue. Black, white and grey are not hues, although we may call them colours in a practical sense, for example, when referring to coloured paints or fabrics.
 Lagging 
Lagging in digital video and computer games means the video or game does not play smoothly at the right frame rate and might stop playing while the software catches up with downloading the necessary files.
 Lightness 
Lightness describes lighter and darker variants of a colour. The lightest "colour" would be white, and the darkest would be black.
 Maritime 
maritime means related to the sea - especially in reference to sea trade or navigation
 Mezzotint 
Mezzotint is a printmaking method that uses an engraving technique to create subtle gradations of tone and deep blacks.
 Mordant 
The term mordant comes from the Latin mordere, "to bite" because it was thought that a mordant helped the dye bite onto the textile fiber so that it would bind with the fibre and not wash out.
 Optics 
Optics is a branch of Physics – it's the science that deals with light. Optics explains how light energy behaves and interacts with matter.
 Pit organs 
Vipers, pythons and boas have holes on their faces called pit organs, which contain a membrane that can detect infrared radiation from warm bodies up to one metre away. At night, the pit organs allow snakes to 'see' an image of their predator or prey — as an infrared camera does — giving them a unique extra sense.[2]
 Polymath 
A polymath is a person who has knowledge and experience in a wide range of subjects.
 Post-production 
Post production editing means work done on an image, film, video or audio recording after capturing the media. This could be work done to a physical or digital object and may include colour grading, colour correction, special effects, titles and soundtrack etc.
 Primary colours 
Primary colours are the basic set of colours that can’t be mixed from other colours - but can be used to mix a gamut of other colours.
 Rainbow spectrum 
The rainbow spectrum is commonly known as the colours ROYGBIV - red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and violet.
 Rods 
Rods are cells in the eye's retina that respond to low-intensity light and help us to see low-resolution, black-and-white images - it's why we can still see things in very low light. Animals that can see in the dark have more rod cells than humans do.
 Saturation 
Saturation is the intensity of the colour. Saturated colours appear very vibrant, whereas  de-saturated colours tend towards white or grey.  A black and white image would have zero colour saturation. Saturation does not relate to how light or dark a colour is.
 Silk Road 
It was called the Silk Road because silk from China travelled westward and was traded for wool, gold and other goods that came from the west and travelled eastward.
 Speed of light 
The speed of light (in a vacuum) is defined as exactly 299,792,458 metres per second
 Stygian 
Stygian means 'very dark'. The word comes from the River Styx in Greek mythology - which was the way to the underworld.
 Subtractive colour 
To learn more about subtractive colour, see  3.1 Additive and Subtractive colour in this resource
 Superimposed 
To superimpose is to place one thing over another, and allowing both to be visible. For example, to display or print an image or text over another image so that both are visible at once. 
 Tapetum lucidum 
The tapetum lucidum is a biologic reflector system that is a common feature in the eyes of vertebrates. It normally functions to provide light-sensitive retinal cells with a second opportunity for photon-photoreceptor stimulation, thereby enhancing visual sensitivity at low-light levels.[3]
 Value (colour) 
Colour Value is also known Brightness: this value is different to Lightness – it relates to how bright a colour is, not how light (pale) or dark a colour is.
 Vantablack 
VANTA is an acronym which stands for Vertically Aligned NanoTube Arrays
 

"Briggs, D. The Difference Between Chroma and Saturation", Munsell Color, https://munsell.com/color-blog/difference-chroma-saturation/, accessed 03/01/2023 ↵

Fang, J. Snake infrared detection unravelled. Nature (2010). https://doi.org/10.1038/news.2010.122 ↵

Ollivier FJ, Samuelson DA, Brooks DE, Lewis PA, Kallberg ME, Komáromy AM. Comparative morphology of the tapetum lucidum (among selected species). Vet Ophthalmol. 2004 Jan-Feb;7(1):11-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1463-5224.2004.00318.x. PMID: 14738502. ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/back-matter-002-list-of-figures-media-and-tables.xhtml =====

2

 
List of Figures, Videos, and Tables

 

 

 
Figures | Videos | Tables
 
 
 
Figures
 
Introduction 
 
Figure 0.1. The visible light spectrum. Image attribution: Vector diagram with the visible light spectrum. Visible light, infrared, and ultraviolet by petrroudny on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Chapter 1
 
Figure 1.1. Boutet 1708 colour circles. Image attribution: C. B. (probably Claude Boutet or its editor, Christophe Ballard), Boutet 1708 color circles, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons.
 
Figure 1.2. Engraving of Sir Isaac Newton. Image attribution: Sir Isaac Newton, date: 1680s by Archivist  on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence). Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 1.3. Depiction of Plato’s Academy. Image attribution: Unknown author, Plato’s Academy mosaic from Pompeii, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.4. Engraving from the title page of Opticae Thesaurus. Image attribution: Opticae Thesaurus, a latin edition of Ibn al-Haytham’s Book of Optics. Among other things it shows how Archimedes allegedly set Roman ships on fire with parabolic mirrors during the Siege of Syracuse. Unknown illustrator, Thesaurus opticus Titelblatt, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.5. Portrait of Robert Grosseteste, Bishop of Lincoln, eyes crossed, seated with miter and crozier, his right hand raised in blessing. Image attribution: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Grosseteste_bishop.jpg Unknown 14th century scribe, Grosseteste bishop, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.6. Da Vinci’s study of the gradation of shadows on spheres. Image attribution: Leonardo da Vinci, Study of the Graduations of Shadows on Spheres, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.7. Newton’s colour circle from his publication Opticks. Image attribution: Isaac Newton, Newton’s color circle, from Opticks. 1704, from Book I, Part II, Proposition VI, Problem 2. Marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.8. Image attribution: Isaac Newton, Opticks, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.9. Goethe’s colour wheel. Image attribution: The original uploader was Luestling at German Wikipedia., Goethe, Farbenkreis zur Symbolisierung des menschlichen Geistes- und Seelenlebens, 1809, marked as public domain, more details onWikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.10. Three-colour printing by Le Blon. Image attribution: Jacob Christoph Le Blon, Le Blon three-color printing, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.11. Chevrel’s chromatic circle. Image attribution: Michel Chevreul, Cercle chromatique Chevreul 3, image marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select images to enlarge.
 
Figure 1.12. Chevrel’s RYB chromatic diagram. Image attribution: Benjamin Stillman after Chevreul, Chevreul’s RYB chromatic diagram, image marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select images to enlarge.
 
Figure 1.13. Maxwell’s three-colour photograph – possibly the first colour photograph. Image attribution: The first color photograph made by the three-color method suggested by James Clerk Maxwell in 1855, taken in 1861 by Thomas Sutton. The subject is a colored ribbon, usually described as a tartan ribbon.
 
Figure 1.14. Pages from Rood’s publication Modern Chromatics With Applications to Art and Industry. Image attribution: Image capture from Modern Chromatics With Applications to Art And Industry  by Ogden N. Rood on Archive.org
 
Figure 1.15. Munsell’s Colour solid cylindrical coordinates – grey. Image attribution: File:Munsell 1943 color solid cylindrical coordinates.png: SharkD derivative work: Datumizer, Munsell 1943 color solid cylindrical coordinates gray, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Figure 1.16. Oswald’s colour system – photograph of physical model. Image attribution: Photograph of Ostwald’s colour system, licenced under GNU Free Documentation License, on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.17. CIE1931xy gamut comparison diagram. Image attribution: BenRG and cmglee, CIE1931xy gamut comparison, text label modifications by Lisa Cianci, 2022,  CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Figure 1.18. CIELAB colour space – 3-dimensional model. Image attribution: Holger kkk Everding, CIELAB color space top view, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
Figure 1.19. Coloured powders used in the Indian Holi festival. Image attribution: Coloured powders used in the Indian Holi festival of colour. Image attribution: Color powder for Holi festival, Hindu tradition by Ruslan Gilmanshin on Adobe Stock licenced to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
Figure 1.20. Logo colours. Image source: Logo color choices of top companies on Canva.  © Copyright Canva, all rights reserved
 
Figure 1.21. RMIT University logo specifications. Image attribution: © Copyright RMIT University 2022, all rights reserved. Select images to enlarge.
 
Figure 1.22. RMIT University logo incorrect usage. Image attribution: © Copyright RMIT University 2022, all rights reserved. Select images to enlarge.
 
Figure 1.23. Image attribution Skin58, Blue Light acne phototherapy iClear, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
Figure 1.24. Newborn Jaundice treatment with a “Bili-lite”. Image attribution: User Jeremykemp on en.wikipedia, Bili light with newborn, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.25. Minerva as the goddess Roma. Image attribution: Dennis Jarvis from Halifax, Canada, Italy-0540 – Dress is not painted…. (5168496402), CC BY-SA 2.0
 
Figure 1.26. Madonna del Cardellino by Raffaello Sanzio shows the Madonna with a blue cloak painted with ultramarine pigment. Image attribution: Raphael artist QS:P170,Q5597, Raffaello Sanzio – Madonna del Cardellino – Google Art Project, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.27. The Milk Maid by Johannes Vermeer. Image attribution: Johannes Vermeer artist QS:P170,Q41264, Johannes Vermeer – Het melkmeisje – Google Art Project, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.28.  Flag-map of the world. Image attribution: Transparent 6lue, Flag-map of the world, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 1.29. Australian Aboriginal Flag Image attribution: Aboriginal artist Harold Thomas (Vector graphics image by Trisreed), Australian Aboriginal Flag, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.30. Pride flag. Image attribution: Philadelphia City Council and Tierney, Philadelphia Pride Flag, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.31. Progress pride flag. Image attribution: Paul2520, LGBTQ+ rainbow flag Quasar “Progress” variant, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.32. Image attribution: Aboriginal rock art in ochre colours, Graeme Churchard from Bristol (51.4414, -2.5242), UK, Aboriginal rock art on the Barnett River, Mount Elizabeth Station, CC BY 2.0
 
Figure 1.33. Luwaytini – digital artwork by Mark Cleaver. Image attribution: Luwaytini by Mark Cleaver, Palawa.
 
Figure 1.34. Image attribution: Homer, Odyssey manuscript. Date: 3rd quarter of the 15th century.

 File:Odyssey_manuscript.jpg photoshopped by Odysses, Odyssey-crop, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.35. A page from Werner’s Nomenclature of Colours: Greys. Image attribution: Werner, Abraham Gottlob, 1749-1817; Syme, Patrick, 1774-1845, editor; Blackwood, William, 1776-1834, bookseller; Cadell, Thomas, 1773-1836, bookseller; James Ballantyne and Co., printer, Werner’s nomenclature of colours: greys, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.36. Bauhaus fabric samples by Otti Berger. Image attribution: Otti Berger artist QS:P170,Q2037742 Creator:Bauhaus, Book MET DP368775, CC0 1.0. Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 1.37. Wheat field with crows, Vincent van Gogh, 1890.  Image attribution: Vincent van Gogh artist QS:P170,Q5582 Google Art Projectでのアーティストの詳細, Vincent van Gogh – Wheatfield with crows – Google Art Project, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.38. Bauhaus cradle by Peter Kelley. Image attribution: Peter Keler artist QS:P170,Q2076225 (Ausführung) Wassily Kandinsky creator QS:P170,Q61064, Bauhauswiege DSC9004, CC0 1.0
 
Figure 1.39. Who’s Afraid of Red, Yellow and Blue IV (1969/70) by Barnett Newman. Image attribution: Rino Porrovecchio from Palermo, Italy, Barnett Newman at Neue Nationalgalerie (2369586886), CC BY-SA 2.0
 
Figure 1.40. Image attribution: Metropolitan Print Company; Copyright 1896 by Raff & Gammon, Edison’s Greatest Marvel-The Vitascope – Restoration, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 1.41. Colour grading example with increased saturation, contrast and blue/purple hues: before (left) and after (right). Image attribution: adapted from Forest. Morning. Fog. No filters or effects. Natural nature by MakZin
 
Chapter 2
 
Figure 2.1. Image attribution:  Visible light spectrum. Color waves length perceived by human eye… by MicroOne on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
Figure 2.2 Quantum wave design. Image attribution: Quantum Wave by agsandrew on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 2.3. Electromagnetic spectrum diagram. Image attribution: Full Electromagnetic Spectrum Information collection…By VectorMine on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
Figure 2.4. The visible spectrum diagram. Image attribution:  Spectrum, visible light diagram… By photoplotnikov on Adobe Stock, licenced to RMIT University (Education licence). Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 2.5. Aurora Borealis (Northern Lights), Alaska. Image attribution: United States Air Force photo by Senior Airman Joshua Strang, Polarlicht 2, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 2.6. Examples of simple convex and concave lenses which can focus or disperse light. Image attribution: Large convex lens and Concave lens images released under the GNU Free Documentation License.
 
Figure 2.7. Camera Obscura engraved drawing. Image attribution: James Ayscough, 1755 james ayscough, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 2.8. Camera Lucida diagram. Image attribution: Unknown author, Camera Lucida in use drawing small figurine, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 2.9. Example of six different types of laser. Image attribution: 彭家杰, LASER, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Figure 2.10. Example of the view looking through a kaleidoscope with coloured glass beads. Image attribution: Albarubescens, Rotational symmetries in designs produced by a kaleidoscopeDSCN2440, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
Figure 2.11. Example of a stereograph image depicting someone viewing a stereograph image through a stereoscope. Image attribution: Underwood & Underwood, Stereograph as an educator, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 2.12. Anaglyph image for red-cyan 3D glasses. Image attribution: John Johnston from Glagow, Scotland, Hammer anaglyph (14656149338), CC BY-SA 2.0
 
Figure 2.13. Two pairs of RealD 3D cinema glasses demonstrating polarising effect. Image attribution: Fritz Jörn at English Wikipedia, TwoRealDglassesblackening, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 2.14. Optical fibres.  Image attribution: BigRiz, Fibreoptic, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Figure 2.15. A silicon photovoltaic cell. Image attribution: Radiotrefoil, Silicon heterojunction solar cell, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
Figure 2.16. Anglo-Autralian telescope at Siding Springs Observatory. Image attribution: Ahilan Parameswaran, Anglo-Australian telescope at Siding Springs Observatory, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Figure 2.17. Tomato with light waves reflecting red light. Image attribution: Lisa Cianci, adapted from tomato isolated by Tim UR on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 2.18. Plant with light waves reflecting green light. Image attribution: adapted from Monstera deliciosa leaf or Swiss cheese plant in white pot by Dewins on Adobe Stock, licences to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 2.19. Mimulus flower photographed in visible light (left) and ultraviolet light (right) showing a dark nectar guide visible to bees but not to humans. Image attribution: Plantsurfer, Mimulus nectar guide UV VIS, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Figure 2.20. Gemstones in a range of colours. Image attribution: Arpingstone, Gem.pebbles.800pix, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 2.21. Periodic table of elements. Image attribution: Periodic table of elements by R4Design.pro. Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 2.22. Beckman Ir-1 Spectrophotometer, c. 1941. Image attribution: Chemical Heritage Foundation, Beckman Ir-1 Spectrophotometer, ca. 1941, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Figure 2.23. Colorimeter. Image attribution: Sonal Shinde, Colorimeter, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
Figure 2.24 Dark room interior with two light sources. Image attribution: Dark contemporary waiting room interior with wooden sideboard by denisismagilov on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 2.25 Example of a selection of red items used in dressmaking. Image attribution: Sewing items border with Scissors and Thread by BillionPhotos.com
 
Figure 2.26 Fluorescent minerals. Image attribution: Fluorescent minerals (Hgrobe 06:16, 26 April 2006 (UTC)) – credit: Hannes Grobe/AWI, Fluorescent minerals hg, CC BY-SA 2.5
 
Figure 2.27. Fluorescent clothes that glow with UV blacklight. Image attribution: Black light theatre Prague, Black light theatre Prague HILT 13, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
Figure 2.28. Video: surfing waves with bioluminescent algae bloom. Media attribution: Bioluminescent algae (Lingulodinium polyedra) bloom in San Diego by Timothy R Fallon, on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 2.29. Red green and blue LEDs. Image attribution: R, G, and B LEDs [7]. by PiccoloNamek, Uploaded to English Wikipedia under GDFL-self (GNU Free Documentation Licence) by the author
 
Figure 2.30. Radium clock dial from the 1950s. Image attribution: Arma95, Radium Dial, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Figure 2.31. A Piezo ignition device. Image attribution: Petteri Aimonen, Piezo igniter, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 2.32. Blue ringed octopus. Image attribution: The Deadly Blue Ringed Octopus by Viks_jin on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 2.33. Daguerrotype photographic image by Louis Daguerre, 1837. Image attribution: Louis Daguerre creator QS:P170,Q131405, Daguerreotype Daguerre Atelier 1837, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 2.34. Early colour photograph of Agen, France by Louis Ducos du Hauron, 1877. Image attribution: Louis Ducos du Hauron (1837 – 1920), Duhauron1877, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 2.35. Chromatography of chlorophyl. Image attribution: Flo~commonswiki, Chromatography of chlorophyll – Step 7, CC BY-SA 2.5
 
Figure 2.36. Test tubes containing solutions of pH 1–10 colored with an indicator. Image attribution: Alvy16, PH scale 3, CC BY 4.0
 
Figure 2.37. Chemistry of Universal Indicator by James Kennedy Monash. Image attribution: Chemistry of Universal Indicator by James Kennedy Monash, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0, select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 2.38. Blue hydrangea flowers. Image attribution: photograph by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
Figure 2.39. How do pregnancy test work?(Embedded image) Image attribution: Compound Interest – How do pregnancy tests work?
 
Figure 2.40. New Year’s Eve Fireworks on Sydney Harbour. Image attribution: Rob Chandler, New Year’s Eve on Sydney Harbour, CC BY-SA 2.0
 
Figure 2.41. Image attribution: this image shared from www.compoundchem.com Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives licence, © Compound Interest 2015
 
Figure 2.42. Image by Lisa Cianci, adapted and remixed from two images attributed here: Anatomy – human eye detail, isolated on white https://stock.adobe.com/au/images/anatomy-human-eye-detail-isolated-on-white/216254118 by acrogame on Adobe Stock licenced to RMIT University (Education Licence), Abstract color background spectrum lines https://stock.adobe.com/au/images/abstract-color-background-spectrum-lines/54849086 by kurkalukas on Adobe Stock licenced to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
Figure 2.43. Anatomy of the human eye. Image attribution: Human eye by blueringmedia on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 2.44. Photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye.  Image attribution: Photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye by designua on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 2.45. Photographic image of rod and cone cells of the retina. Image attribution: Helga Kolb, Rrods and cones of the primate retina, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
Figure 2.46. Red Square with white interior. Image attribution: Red Square with white interior by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
Figure 2.47. Red afterimage: cyan square with grey interior. Image attribution: Red afterimage: cyan square with grey interior by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
Figure 2.48. Diagram for viewing “impossible” chimerical colours that are only accessible via fatigue effects in the human eye. Image attribution: Lisa Cianci, adapted from an image by Zowie at English Wikipedia, Chimerical-color-demo, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Figure 2.49. Human Brain, Sagittal Section. Image attribution: Human Brain Sagittal Section with labels by HANK GREBE on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 2.50. Relative colour animation: pink to green. Image attribution: Relative colour animation: pink to green by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
Figure 2.51. Comparisons of vision differences: normal trichromacy, deuteranopia, tritanopia and monochromacy. Image attributions:

 Q-lieb-in, Вечір на “інтегралі” – річка Південний Буг, CC BY-SA 4.0, Tohaomg, Deuteranopia sight, CC BY-SA 4.0, Tohaomg, Tritanopia sight, CC BY-SA 4.0, Tohaomg, Monochromacy sight, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
Figure 2.52. A comparison of the visible colour spectrum in common types of colour blindness. diagram. Image attribution: SyntaxTerror, Color blindness, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 2.53. Ishihara Plate 9. Image attribution: Original: Shinobu Ishihara creator QS:P170,Q530761 Derivative work: Pbrks, Ishihara 9, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 2.54. Entwurf 2 zu Komposition VII by Wassily Kandinsky.  Image attribution: Wassily Kandinsky artist QS:P170,Q61064, Entwurf 2 zu Komposition VII (Wassily Kandinsky) DSC1682, CC0 1.0
 
Figure 2.55. Image showing the difference between equality and equity. Image attribution: Equality and Equity Concept Illustration. by juliabatsheva on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 2.56. Some examples of good and bad colour combinations for accessibility. Image attribution: image by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0. Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 2.57. Owl eyes – front view. Image attribution: owl eye… by Ammit on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 2.58. Monkey eye. Image attribution: Monkey’s eyes look at you by Thanaphat on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 2.59. Gecko eye. Image attribution: Colorful Toke’s gecko amazing eye macro by Passakorn on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 2.60. Horsefly eyes. Image attribution: horsefly insect macro green eye big color by murgvi on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Chapter 3
 
Figure 3.1. Colour Wheel. Image adapted from True precision step graduated color wheel for art theory by Igor on Adobe Stock licenced to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
Figure 3.2. Additive and subtractive colour primaries. Image attribution:Additive and Subtractive colour primaries by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
Figure 3.3. Interactive Additive Colour Mixer. Image attribution: Interactive Additive Colour Mixer by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
Figure 3.4. Interactive Subtractive Colour Mixer. Image attribution: Interactive Additive Colour Mixer by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
Figure 3.5. How subtractive colour works. Image attribution: Lemons diagram by Lisa Cianci, adapted from Adobe Stock images, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence). Images 86024180 by Studio KIVI, 287461840 by Yuri Hoyda and 146119533 by Lysenko.A
 
Figure 3.6. RGB colour wheel.  Image attribution: RGB colour wheel with primary secondary tertiary colours by krissada 0n Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.7. Red, blue, yellow colour wheel. Image attribution: adapted from Colour Wheel – Red Blue Yellow colour by Nattaya on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.8. RGB to CMYK conversion flow diagram. Image attribution: RGB to CMYK conversion By Maxim_Kazmin on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
Figure 3.9. Additive colour – three torches. Image attribution: Three torch diagram by Lisa Cianci adapted from Flashlight vector with light by FARBAI on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Educational licence)
 
Figure 3.10. Additive colour – two filters on one torch. Image attribution: Two filter diagram by Lisa Cianci adapted from Flashlight vector with light by FARBAI on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Educational licence)
 
Figure 3.11 Hand holding coloured felt-tipped pens. Image attribution: Child hand holding many colourful felt-tip pens by Alexander on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Educational licence)
 
Figure 3.12. Colour slider example. Image attribution: Colour slider image from GIMP image manipulation software application, GNU public licence v.3
 
Attribution for images used in this quiz all on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence):
 
Figure 3.13. Title: Abstract color background spectrum lines by kurkalukas

 Figure 3.14. Question 1: Watercolour circles by Liliia

 Figure 3.15. Question 2: Colourful stage lighting by kittiyaporn1027

 Figure 3.16. Question 3: Graphic designer, logo design by REDPIXEL

 Figure 3.17. Question 4: bitcoin logo t shirt design by specialist t shirt

 Figure 3.18. Question 5: Purple wavy hair on white background by MAKOVSKY ART
 
Figure 3.19. Digital colour image. Image attribution: Futuristic Digital Light Technology by A Luna Blue
 
Figure 3.20. Image attribution: Difference between cmyk and rgb color space in a lab or CIELAB color space by petrroudny on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.21. Test Pattern. Image attribution:  Test pattern for PAL video format by chathuporn on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.22. Colour Picker showing various RGB colour values. Image attribution: Colour picker image from GIMP image manipulation software application, GNU public licence v.3
 
Figure 3.23. Colour converter tool. Media attribution:  Interactive colour converter (JavaScript) by Derk Jan Speelman on CodePen
 
Figure 3.24. Waveform (RGB) data from MP4 video. Image attribution: Waveform RGB data from MP4 video by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
Figure 3.25. Example of low and high resolution versions of the same image. Image attribution: Australian landscape by vaclav on Adobe Stock , licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.26. Video resolutions comparison. Image attribution:  Visual comparison between different video resolution sizes By Kaspars Grinvalds on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence).
 
Figure 3.27 Printing machine with CMYK colour. Image attribution: Printing machine by adimas on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.28. Image attribution:  Large format printing machine in operation by DmyTo on Adobe Stock, licenced to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.29. Image attribution: Pantone sample colours catalogue by REDPIXEL on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.30. Image attribution: Worker checking print quality of media graphics proof in printing industry by Panumas on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.31 artist’s watercolour palette. Used large watercolor palette on old wooden table – top view by Greg Brave on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
Figure 3.32.  Portrait of George, Prince of Wales, later George III by Liotard. Image attribution: Jean-Étienne Liotard artist QS:P170,Q123757, George, Prince of Wales, later George III, 1754 by Liotard, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 3.33 Artist’s palette. Image attribution: Artist’s palette by R. Gino Santa Maria on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.34 Ochre pigment. Image attribution: ocher – background by ottoflick
 
Figure 3.35, Dyeing indigo cotton. Image attribution: Craftsmen of Thai indigo cotton… by Thirawatana
 
Figure 3.36 Cinnabar vein in stone. Image attribution: Shining cinnabar vein in grey stone texture by Ekaterina
 
Figure 3.37. Cobalt Oxide Green pigment. Image attribution: Cobalt Oxide Green pigment on a white background by Vantsura
 
Figure 3.38. Violet silk. Image attribution: Black blue purple silk satin background…. by Наталья Босяк
 
Figure 3.39. Soap bubble. Image attribution: Brocken Inaglory, Soap bubble sky, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Figure 3.40. Image attribution: Image attribution: Oil paint and brushes by Dmitry Pichugin on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.41 Indigo dyeing process. Image attribution: Cotton line dyeing with natural colors… by ownza on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.42. Hunting Carpet made by Ghyath ud-Din Jami, Wool, cotton and silk, 1542–1543, Museo Poldi Pezzoli, Milan. Image attribution: Ghyas el Din Jami – Weaver (Persian) Born in North-West Persia. Died in North-West Persia.

 Google Art Projectでのアーティストの詳細, Ghyas el Din Jami – Tabriz (?) – Google Art Project, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 3.43. Eucalyptus tereticornis buds, capsules, flowers and foliage, Rockhampton, Queensland. Image attribution:L Ethel Aardvark, Eucalyptus tereticornis flowers, capsules, buds and foliage, CC BY 3.0
 
Figure 3.44. Image attribution: Colorful silk thread from natural dye color to weaving by thanasak on Adobe Stock, licensed to MRIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.45. Image attribution: chemical color pigments by roostler on Adobe Stock, licensed to MRIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.46. Rainbow-coloured hair. Image attribution: A rainbow colored hairstyle of a woman who visits the lesbian and gay street party in Berlin-Germany by Frank Middendorf on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.47. Image attribution: Dyeing Machine Chemical Tanks by Voy_ager on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.48. Fluorescent paints. Image attribution: Abstract vibrant multi-color wet paint drops and splotch on black background by NadiaA on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.49. Phosphorescent (glow-in-the-dark) paint – hand prints. Image attribution: Spooky hands prints by Igor Kovalchuk
 
Figure 3.50. Thermochromic “Magic” Mug.  Media attribution: Magic mug, WEBM video from Wikimedia commons
 
Figure 3.51. TVR Tuscan Speed Six car painted with ChromaFlair interference pigment. Image attribution: Mytho88, TVR Tuscan 01, CC BY-SA 3.0 from Wikimedia commons
 
Figure 3.52. Artwork L’accord Bleu by Yves Klein, 1960, using International Klein Blue pigment. Image attribution: Jaredzimmerman (WMF), L’accord bleu (RE 10), 1960, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Figure 3.53. A sample of Vantablack pigment covering aluminium foil. Image attribution: Surrey NanoSystems, Vantablack 01, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Figure 3.54. an example of vibrant pink powdered pigment (not Pinkest Pink) Image attribution: Pink pigments for decoration, manicure, makeup. Cosmetic, beauty products by Михаил Куница on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.55. Painting by Martin Drolling, 1815 showing use of Mummy brown pigment. Image attribution: Martin Drolling artist QS:P170,Q3295410, Martin Drolling – Interior of a Kitchen (detail) – WGA6679, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 3.56. Indian Yellow Pigment. Image attribution: Shisha-Tom, Indisch-Gelb, CC BY-SA 3.0. Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 3.57. Old tin of Paris Green paint. Image attribution: Chris goulet at English Wikipedia, Paris Green (Schweinfurter Grün), CC BY-SA 3.0. Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 3.58. Old tin of Dutch Boy white lead paint. Image attribution: Thester11, LeadPaint1, CC BY 3.0. Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 3.59. Painting by Joshua Reynolds – the vermilion cloak has faded from a vibrant red to a pale pink over time. Image attribution: Joshua Reynolds artist QS:P170,Q194402, Charles Coote, 1st Earl of Bellamont, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 3.60. Dried and Crushed Cochineal Insects. Image attribution: Dried and Crushed Cochineal Insects by raptorcaptor on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence). Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 3.61. Indigo plant (Indigofera tinctoria) Image attribution: Kurt Stüber, Indigofera tinctoria1, CC BY-SA 3.0. Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 3.62. Photograph of a factory scene from 1922, United States Radium Corporation showing women and girls using radium paint with no protection or warnings. Image attribution: Unknown author, All women or girls using radium paint with no protection or warnings in 1922, from- USRadiumGirls-Argonne1,ca1922-23-150dpi (cropped), marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select image to enlarge.
 
Figure 3.63 Harris’ RYB Colour Wheel. Image attribution: Moses Harris, The Natural System of Colours and Ignaz Schiffermüller, Versuch eines Farbensystems (Vienna, 1772), plate I, Moses Harris, The Natural System of Colours, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Figure 3.64. Interactive colour wheel by Benjamin Knight. Media attribution: A Pen created on CodePen.io. Original URL: https://codepen.io/benknight/pen/MWmydp, The MIT License (MIT) Copyright (c) 2022 Benjamin Knight
 
Figure 3.65. Colour wheel diagram showing monochrome colours. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page.
 
Figure 3.66. Colour wheel diagram showing analogous colour hues. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page.
 
Figure 3.67. Colour wheel diagram showing complementary colour hues. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page.
 
Figure 3.68. Colour wheel diagram showing split-complementary colour hues. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page.
 
Figure 3.69. Colour wheel diagram showing triadic colour hues. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page.
 
Figure 3.70. Colour wheel diagram showing tetradic colour hues. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page.
 
Image attributions for this page: Colour wheel images on this page adapted from Color Wheel Theory by Marin Bulat on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence).
 
Figure 3.71. Hue colour wheel. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page
 
Figure 3.72. Saturation colour wheel. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page
 
Figure 3.73. Value colour wheel. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page
 
Figure 3.74. Tints colour wheel Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page
 
Figure 3.75. Shades colour wheel. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page
 
Figure 3.76. Tones colour wheel. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page
 
Image attribution for this page: adapted from Adobe Stock images, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence): Color Theory Tints, Tones and Shades Vector Chart Illustration with Color Wheels by csiling, Color Theory HSV or Hue, Saturation, Value (Brightness) Illustration Chart by csiling
 
Figure 3.77. Photographic image of two Pantone colour guides. Image attribution: Pantone color palette by art_rich on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Figure 3.78. Twenty hues of the Munsell colour system at maximum chroma in the sRGB gamut. Image attribution: Thenoizz, MunsellColorWheel, CC BY 3.0
 
 
 
Videos
 
Chapter 1
 
Media attribution: How Technicolor changed movies, Phil Edwards, Vox on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Color film was built for white people. Here’s what it did to dark skin, Vox on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Moonlight | Official Trailer HD, A24, on YouTube
 
Chapter 2
 
Media attribution: Is Light a Wave or a Particle? – Ask a Spaceman, Paul M. Sutter on YouTube
 
Media attribution: A History of how Optics Has Helped Artists Create Better Paintings, Inside Science, on YouTube
 
Media attribution: How to make a Pinhole Camera, George Eastman Museum on YouTube
 
Media attribution: How to Turn a Room into a Camera Obscura, George Eastman Museum, on YouTube
 
Media attribution: How It’s Made: Kaleidoscopes, Science Channel, on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Chameleons are Masters of Nanotechnology by Reactions on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Test asides with home-made pH indicator, BBC Earth Lab on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Chemist Breaks Down How At-Home Covid Tests Work | WIRED by Wired on YouTube
 
Media attribution: How Your Eyes Make Sense of the World | Decoder, National Geographic, on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Optical Illusions show how we see | Beau Lotto, Ted on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Everything You See is Fake | Fractured Realities, BBC Earth Lab on YouTube
 
Media attribution: What is Colour Blindness? – A Week in Science, Royal Institute of Australia on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Seeing colours nobody else can – Incredible Medicine: Dr Weston’s Casebook | Episode 2 – BBC 2, BBC on YouTube
 
Media attribution: What color is Tuesday? Exploring synesthesia – Richard E. Cytowic, Ted Ed on YouTube
 
Chapter 3
 
Media attribution: Explaining Image file Formats, Explaining Computers on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Explaining Digital Video: Formats, Codecs & Containers, Explaining Computers on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Essential Tips Converting RGB To CMYK | The Art Of Printing | Getting Started | Matt Irwin, Matt Erwin Photography on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Red, White & Black Ochre, Paul Taylor on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Egyptian Blue: How an Ancient Pigment Could Save Lives, SciShow  on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Saturday University: Dragon’s Blood and the Blood of Dragons Seattle Art Museum on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Raw vs Burnt Earth Colors, Walcott Fine Art on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Artist’s White paint: Zinc White Issues Malcom Dewey on YouTube
 
Media attribution: A Beautiful New. Blue Makes Its Debut, Oregon Public Broadcasting on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Why Red and Blue Make Brown: Color Wheel Myth Dispelled, WriteArt on YouTube
 
Media Attribution: The Link Between Japanese Samurai and Real Indigo, WhyNow – Great Big Story on YouTube
 
Media Attribution: What is Batik? Historically Speaking, Ours For All on YouTube
 
Media Attribution: The History of Indigo Dye, Merit Store on YouTube
 
Media Attribution: Conserving the Emperor’s Carpet, The Met on YouTube
 
Media Attribution: West African Textiles, BurroGrande Films on YouTube
 
Media Attribution: Tyrian Purple | History of Colours, Little Art Talks on YouTube
 
Media Attribution: Iron Age Dyes: Woad, Weld & Madder, Sally Pointer on YouTube
 
Media Attribution: Where Did Blue Jeans Begin? | Riveted: The history of Jeans, American Experience | PBS on YouTube
 
Media Attribution: Cochineal Origins, Harvard Museums of Science and Culture on YouTube
 
Media Attribution: Fashion that SLAYED!? A History of Fabric Dyes (and all the damage early chemical dyes did), Emily Snee on YouTube
 
Media attribution: I Painted My Entire Room With Musou Black—The World’s Blackest Paint, by The Action Lab on YouTube
 
Media attribution: The library of rare colours by Tom Scott on YouTube
 
Media attribution: ICD 2022: The Dimensions of Colour Today (David Briggs), Colour Society of Australia NSW Division on YouTube
 
Media attribution: Watch: How Animals and People See the World Differently, National Geographic, on YouTube
 

 
Tables
 
Table 1.1. Colour Associations
 
Table 1.2 Chinese colour symbolism
 
Table 1.3 Pantone Colour of the Year 2011-2022

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-001-antiquity-c-500-bce-300-ce.xhtml =====

Antiquity (c. 500 BCE to 300 CE)

 

 

 
Ancient philosophy and theories of colour vision
 

 Figure 1.3. Depiction of Plato’s Academy. Image attribution: Unknown author, Plato’s Academy mosaic from Pompeii, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Ancient Greek philosophers such as Democritus, Plato (See Figure 1.3) and Aristotle devised theories of colour based on the teachings of Pythagoras and theories of music, maths, astronomy, and universal harmony. The four colours of white, black, red and yellow were popular as the basic and elemental colours used in much of ancient Greek artwork – perhaps because of the plentiful earthy pigments (ochres) that were used at the time.
 
Democritus theorised about energy and the characteristics of atoms in an object which created visible colours. Plato thought that the eye transmitted rays of vision towards an object (fire rays placed in our eyes by the gods), which also self-radiated rays of colour.
 
Aristotle, however, rejected theories of the eye radiating rays of vision because if that were true, he argued, we would have the ability to see at night. Aristotle’s colour system included seven primary colours: white, black, red (crimson), yellow, violet, green and blue.
 
Ptolemy (Claudius Ptolemaeus), an ancient astronomer, geographer, and mathematician, considered the Earth the centre of the universe (the “Ptolemaic system”). He experimented with optics and light refraction, and believed that the eye generates rays which send back information about colour, shape, size and distance.

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-002-middle-ages-and-renaissance-c-400-to-1600-ce.xhtml =====

Middle Ages and Renaissance (c. 400 to 1600 CE)

 

 

 
The Islamic Golden Age: optics and colour systems
 

 
Figure 1.4. Engraving from the title page of Opticae Thesaurus. Image attribution: Opticae Thesaurus, a latin edition of Ibn al-Haytham’s Book of Optics. Among other things it shows how Archimedes allegedly set Roman ships on fire with parabolic mirrors during the Siege of Syracuse. Unknown illustrator, Thesaurus opticus Titelblatt, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
During the Islamic Golden Age (8th to 14th centuries), Arabic Islamic scholars moved away from the theories of Aristotle and Ptolemy to make their own discoveries in colour theory. Between the years 800 – 1200 CE, scholars such as al-Kindi, Ibn al-Haythem (Alhazen) and Ibn Rushd (Averroes), concluded that light was necessary for seeing colours – not rays from the eyes.
 
Ibn al-Haythem (known as the father of modern optics – Figure 1.4) experimented with light and glass spheres of water, observing a rainbow spectrum – the bending (refraction) of light rays into different colours. He noted that red light rays bent the least, and blue light rays bent the most. The scholar Nishaburi proposed the beginnings of a hue scale for describing colour in a system.

 Ibn al-Haythem, Book of Optics, c. 1011 CE
 
The Middle Ages: Grosseteste’s colour system
 

 
Figure 1.5. Portrait of Robert Grosseteste, Bishop of Lincoln, eyes crossed, seated with miter and crozier, his right hand raised in blessing. Image attribution: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Grosseteste_bishop.jpg Unknown 14th century scribe, Grosseteste bishop, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Around 1200 CE, the scholar Robert Grosseteste (Bishop of Lincoln and, it is speculated, the first chancellor of Oxford University – Figure 1.5) developed a colour system of seven colours. Although we don’t know what those colours were, he may have been the first to separate chromatic colours (red, green, blue, yellow) from achromatic colours (black, grey, and white) in a colour system.
 
The Renaissance:  colour primaries and colour wheels
 

 
Figure 1.6 Da Vinci’s study of the gradation of shadows on spheres. Image attribution: Leonardo da Vinci, Study of the Graduations of Shadows on Spheres, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Leon Battista Alberti and Leonardo da Vinci were Italian Renaissance artists and polymaths who both had an interest in colour theory from a practical perspective (circa 1450 to 1500 CE). They wanted to understand colour to better mix pigments for painting artworks. Alberti recognised four colours (yellow, green, blue, red) – although he found yellow to be a problematic colour and sometimes replaced it with grey in his four-colour square. Da Vinci investigated the complexities of colour, light and physical materials such as pigments (Figure 1.6). He listed six colours as his basic primaries (white, yellow, green, blue, red, black). He included green in his primaries although he recognised that green could be mixed from yellow and blue making it also a secondary colour.
 
Aron Sigfrid Forsius – a Finnish astronomer, documented his theory on the colour values Hue, Saturation and Value in 1611.
 
The physician and mystic Robert Fludd is credited with developing the first colour wheel based on Aristotle’s theories of colour around 1629 to 1631.

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-003-the-enlightenment-c-1650-to-1800.xhtml =====

The Enlightenment (c. 1650 to 1800)

 

 

 
Newton: the rainbow spectrum and optics
 

 Figure 1.7. Newton’s colour circle from his publication Opticks. Image attribution: Isaac Newton, Newton’s color circle, from Opticks. 1704, from Book I, Part II, Proposition VI, Problem 2. Marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Sir Isaac Newton is credited with developing the first colour wheel in 1672 (Figure 1.7) based on colour hue relationships. He identified the rainbow spectrum through his experiments with light and prisms. His work led to many breakthroughs in optics, physics and chemistry. Newton’s publication Opticks (Figure 1.8) is recognised as one of the great works of science. It documents Newton’s discoveries in identifying the visible spectrum and the colours ROYGBIV (Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Indigo, Violet). See Chapter 2 – Colour theory: the visible spectrum for details about this theory.

 Link to the Gutenberg Ebook of Opticks
 

 Figure 1.8. Image attribution: Isaac Newton, Opticks, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Goethe and Schopenhauer: perceptual colour and colour aesthetics
 
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (poet and artist), published his Theory of Colors in 1810 (Figure 1.9).  He was dismissed by many, perhaps because he refuted Newton’s theories of colour by suggesting that colour was subjectively experienced. He thought that darkness was an important part of the colour spectrum. His explorations of the psychological impact of colour on mood is considered the earliest systematic study of this kind.
 
His work influenced artists like J.M.W. Turner (Painting Light and Colour (Goethe’s Theory)- the Morning after the Deluge. Moses writing the Book of Genesis 1943). View this painting on The Tate gallery website: The Tate:Joseph Mallord William Turner, Light and Colour (Goethe’s Theory) – the Morning after the Deluge – Moses Writing the Book of Genesis
 

 
Figure 1.9. Goethe’s colour wheel. Image attribution: The original uploader was Luestling at German Wikipedia., Goethe, Farbenkreis zur Symbolisierung des menschlichen Geistes- und Seelenlebens, 1809, marked as public domain, more details onWikimedia Commons
 
The German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer wrote his book On Vision and Colours, which was heavily influenced by his discussions with Goethe. Despite theoretical differences, they were both interested in physiological perception of colour. Johannes Itten based his work with colour on these theories (see 1.3 Colour Aesthetics for more about Itten).
 
Learn more here:
 
The Marginalia – Goethe: Theory of Colour
 
Smithsonian Libraries: The Science of Colour
 
 
 
Le Blon: the first three-colour printing method
 
Jacob Christoph Le Blon (a.k.a. Jakob Christoffel Le Blon) was the first to devise a three-colour printing method in 1710, using the traditional primary colours Red, Yellow and Blue (Figure 1.10). This formed the basis for our CMYK colour printing system today. He used the printing method of Mezzotint to create three or four engraved plates, each with a different colour, which allowed for making prints with a wide range of colours.
 

See his book on Archive.org: Coloritto, or, The harmony of colouring in painting : reduced to mechanical practice, under easy precepts and infallible rules, together with some colour’d figures, in order to render the said precepts and rules intelligible not only to painters, but even to all lovers of painting:
 
Archive.org: Coloritto
 

 
Figure 1.10. Three-colour printing by Le Blon. Image attribution: Jacob Christoph Le Blon, Le Blon three-color printing, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-004-modern-era-c-1850-to-1980.xhtml =====

Modern era (c. 1850 to 1980)

 

 

 

 
Figure 1.11. Chevrel’s chromatic circle. Image attribution: Michel Chevreul, Cercle chromatique Chevreul 3, image marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select images to enlarge.
 
Chevreul: 72-colour wheel and perceptual colour
 

 
Figure 1.12. Chevrel’s RYB chromatic diagram. Image attribution: Benjamin Stillman after Chevreul, Chevreul’s RYB chromatic diagram, image marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select images to enlarge.
 
The chemist Michel Eugène Chevreul devised a 72-colour wheel in 1839 (Figures 1.11 and 1.12) which not only showed primary colours, but also showed secondary and tertiary colours, and different brightness levels. He experimented with dyes for carpet manufacture, and through this work, identified the relationships of colours when placed next to each other, and how our perception of colour is relational. His work in the field of optics and the way the human brain interprets colour had an important influence on many art movements, including Impressionism and Orphic Cubism.
 

 
Maxwell: RGB primaries and the first colour photograph
 

 
Figure 1.13. Maxwell’s three-colour photograph – possibly the first colour photograph. Image attribution: The first color photograph made by the three-color method suggested by James Clerk Maxwell in 1855, taken in 1861 by Thomas Sutton. The subject is a colored ribbon, usually described as a tartan ribbon.
 
Physicist James Clerk Maxwell was the first to suggest that red, green and blue make better primary colours than red, yellow and blue (based on Newton’s theory of the visible spectrum and that red, green and blue light can be used to make all other colours). He also explored colour blindness in his research.
 
His paper “On the theory of compound colours, and the relations of the colors of the spectrum”[1] in 1860, is recognised as an important contribution to colour theory. He may have also been the first person to take a colour photograph of an object in 1861 (Figure 1.13) by projecting three negatives with red, green and blue coloured lights – as shown in Figure 13.
 

 
Rood: perceptual colour blending and the Impressionists
 

 Figure 1.14. Pages from Rood’s publication Modern Chromatics With Applications to Art and Industry. Image attribution: Image capture from Modern Chromatics With Applications to Art And Industry  by Ogden N. Rood on Archive.org
 
Ogden Nicholas Rood, a physicist, divided colour into three constants: purity, luminosity and hue – similar to Maxwell’s properties of colour. He also developed a theory of contrasting and complementary colours – suggesting that small lines or dots of different colours, when viewed from a distance, blend into a new colour. This work had a great influence on the Impressionist pointillist painters like Georges-Pierre Seurat. Rood published Modern Chromatics, with Applications to Art and Industry[2], in 1879 (Figure 1.14).
 

 
The Munsell colour system
 

 Figure 1.15. Munsell’s Colour solid cylindrical coordinates – grey. Image attribution: File:Munsell 1943 color solid cylindrical coordinates.png: SharkD derivative work: Datumizer, Munsell 1943 color solid cylindrical coordinates gray, CC BY-SA 3.0
 

Albert Henry Munsell (an artist and art teacher) developed the Munsell color system in 1915. It is still one of the most-used colour systems – especially in design. His colour system is said to span art and science due to the numbering system he developed to classify colour, which is rigorous enough for scientific use, but also simple enough for artists or those with no scientific background to understand. His system is associated with the word “chroma”, which is the saturation or intensity of hue.
 
 

Learn more about the Munsell Color System and Munsell Color company in this publication on Project Gutenberg: A Color Notation by A.H. Munsell, 1905
 
 
 
 
Ostwald: colour aesthetics, the Bauhaus and De Stijl
 

 Figure 1.16. Oswald’s colour system – photograph of physical model. Image attribution: Photograph of Ostwald’s colour system, licenced under GNU Free Documentation License, on Wikimedia Commons
 
 
Wilhelm Ostwald (a Nobel prize winner in Chemistry), explored colour harmonies and why some colours look pleasant when placed together and others look unpleasant. He attempted to find a scientific theory for colour harmony – The Colour Primer 1916/1917 was the most notable publication he produced. His perceptual colour system (Figure 1.16) was different to Munsell’s in that he identified Colour-content, White-content and Black-content. Ostwald was associated with the Bauhaus and while his theories did not gain the same popularity or acceptance as Munsell’s, his work influenced many artists such as Piet Mondrian, and other artists of the de Stijl group[3].
 

Maxwell, J. C. (1860). On the Theory of Compound Colours, and the Relations of the Colours of the Spectrum. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 150, 57–84. http://www.jstor.org/stable/108759 ↵

Modern Chromatics With Applications To Art And Industry, 1879 on Archive.org ↵

Ball, Philip, and Mario Ruben. “Color Theory in Science and Art: Ostwald and the Bauhaus.” Angewandte Chemie (International ed.) 43, no. 37 (2004): 4842–4847. ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-005-contemporary-colour-systems-c-1930-2020.xhtml =====

Contemporary Colour Systems (c. 1930 – 2020+)

 

 

 

 Figure 1.17. CIE1931xy gamut comparison diagram. Image attribution: BenRG and cmglee, CIE1931xy gamut comparison, text label modifications by Lisa Cianci, 2022,  CC BY-SA 3.0
 

CIE 1931 colour spaces
 
 

CIE stands for “Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage” in French, which in English is the “International Commission on Illumination”.  This organisation, founded in 1931, is the international authority on light, illumination, colour, and colour spaces.
 
The CIE 1931 colour spaces made the first clearly defined links between wavelengths in the visible spectrum and colour vision in humans.  The development of this colour space became the standard tool for colour management in printing, digital displays and cameras. The two colour spaces – CIE 1931 RGB and CIE 1931 XYZ – were developed from a series of experiments in the late 1920s by William David Wright and John Guild.
 
These colour spaces and others, such as the CIELUV 1976 colour space, are still widely used. Figure 17 shows the CIE 1931 xy colour space and other colour space gamuts within CIE. As you can see in Figure 1.17, CMYK has a smaller gamut than the various RGB colour spaces – which can affect colour conversion for printing. See 3.3 Colour systems: printing in this resource for more information on colour spaces and conversion to CMYK.
 
 
 
CIELAB colour space
 
CIELAB colour space – also referred to as CIE L*a*b – is a colour space defined by the International Commission on Illumination (CIE) in 1976. Its three colour values are L – perceptual lightness, and a/b for what was thought to be at the time, the four unique colours of human vision: red, green, blue and yellow.
 
a = red/green scale
 
b = blue/yellow scale
 
CIELAB is intended to represent a perceptual colour space – what the human eye can see – i.e. a human colour gamut.  LAB colour is a device-independent colour space that doesn’t relate to any particular technology like a computer, television or printer. This differs from colour systems like RGB or CMYK, which are dependent on specific devices or applications. Because CIELAB has a wider gamut than other colour spaces, it is a useful system for detecting small variations in colour, although depending on the limitations of your device to display or print colour, not all LAB colours may be accurately visually represented.
 
We often see CIELAB colour space represented as a 2-dimensional graph as in Figure 1.17, however, the best representation is in 3-dimensions, as shown in Figure 1.18.
 

 
Figure 1.18. CIELAB colour space – 3-dimensional model. Image attribution: Holger kkk Everding, CIELAB color space top view, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
View Chapter 3: Colour theory: working with colour for more detailed information about colour systems used in digital and physical media.

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-006-colour-theory-history-resources.xhtml =====

History of colour theory: references and resources

 

 

 
Here are some useful links to library subject guide resources and other online resources to further your research.
 
RMIT Library: Interior design subject guide
 
For more detailed history of colour theory and systems, visit this informative guide to Colour order systems in art and science by Prof. Narciso Silvestrini and Prof. Ernst Peter Fischer.
 
Also see the Routledge handbook of Philosophy of Colour for a more academic approach to colour theory.

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-007-colour-psychology-physiology.xhtml =====

Colour psychology and physiology

 
Colour Theory: History and Culture

 

 

 
It is generally accepted that colour can affect our emotions and mood. Different colours have been identified as triggering certain emotional or physical reactions. Colours can have both positive and negative associations and these can vary for each person.
 
Are emotional links to colour universal?
 
Recent studies investigating emotional links to colour have found that although our perceptions and uses of colour can be specific to different cultural groups, some links are shared universally[1].
 

 

This page provides some background into theories of colour and its effect on human psychology and physiology. Topics covered:
 

Colour associations
 
Colour in advertising and logo design
 
Colour, psychology and art therapy
 
Colour and medical therapy
 
 
 
Colour associations
 
You might have your own colour associations like these listed in Table 1.1 – can you think of any more emotions or states to add to these colours that have meaning for you?
 

Red 
heat, activity, anger, danger, passion, energy

 
 Yellow 
happiness, warmth, positivity, cheerfulness, compassion
 Blue 
cold/coolness, stability, loyalty, seriousness, envy, trust, peace
 
 
Purple 
wisdom, power, imagination, spirituality, royalty, sophistication, mystery
 Orange 
warning, warmth, fun, youth, optimism, excitement
 
 
 Green 
calm, serenity, relaxation, renewal, envy, wealth, abundance
 
 
Pink 
love, affection, romance, softness, kindness, sweetness
 
 
 Gold 
wealth, fortune, luxury, triumph, royalty, abundance, glamour
 
 
 Brown 
practicality, honesty, simplicity, dependability, trustworthiness
 
 
White 
purity, cleanliness, innocence, perfection, spirituality
 
 
 Black 
elegance, drama, power, death, evil
 
 
 Grey 
stability, authority, maturity, modernity, the mundane, sadness, boredom
 
 
 
Table 1.1 Colour Associations
 
View this infographic on the Information is Beautiful website for more colour associations.
 
Colour in advertising and logo design
 

 
Figure 1.20. Logo colours. Image source: Logo color choices of top companies on Canva.  © Copyright Canva, all rights reserved
 
 
 
Many studies and articles you will find online about how colours affect our emotions and mood are anecdotal – that means they are not based on reliable research or factual evidence. However, there is significant evidence in marketing research that colour plays an important role in what we buy and how we are attracted to different products.
 
For example, it’s no coincidence that popular fast-food companies like McDonald’s or Hungry Jack’s have red and yellow logos and packaging designs – these colours are said to stimulate appetite.
 
Other well-known colours in advertising include Coca-Cola red, Facebook blue, Cadbury purple, Fanta orange, Android green, and Barbie pink. These colours have become iconic in contemporary culture, and it is easy to associate the colour with the product. See Figure 1.20 for some examples of well-known logo designs arranged by colour. Do you notice any patterns? Do certain types of businesses prefer certain colours?
 
Learn more about the psychology of colour in marketing.
 
Logo design
 
Colour in logo design can be used to communicate meaning about a particular brand or product and what an organisation/individual represents or how they want their customers to perceive them.  Some logos may have different colour versions depending on usage, many iconic logos use consistent colour and have strict rules about usage. For example, have you ever seen a green Coca-Cola can with pink text? Probably not!
 
If you are designing a logo for yourself or a client, you may need to create a style guide or brand guide which is a way of controlling and communicating how your logo and other graphics must be used. Colour information is very important in a style guide. You should include information about the colours that can be used in the logo and background, how much space should be around the logo, the relative size and scale of the logo, and where it can be positioned on printed or screen media.
 
For example, RMIT University’s brand guidelines (Figures 1.21 and 1.22) give very clear instructions for the correct and incorrect ways the logo may be coloured and positioned.
 
Figure 1.21 RMIT University logo specifications. Image attribution: © Copyright RMIT University 2022, all rights reserved. Select images to enlarge.
 

 
Figure 1.22. RMIT University logo incorrect usage. Image attribution: © Copyright RMIT University 2022, all rights reserved. Select images to enlarge.
 
Learn more about colour and logos from these online resources:
 
Color psychology: the logo color tricks used by top companies
 
Exciting red and competent blue – the importance of color in marketing
 
The colour emotion guide
 
Psychology of colour in logo design
 
Colour, psychology and art therapy
 
Colour, personality and pseudoscience
 
Colour has also historically been linked to human psychological traits and personality types, although these theories are now outdated and have no basis in current psychology. One of the better-known examples of this is from the work of Carl Jung who was a Swiss psychiatrist and psychoanalyst in the early 20th century. He is quoted as saying “colours are the mother tongue of the subconscious” and “colours express the main psychic functions of man”.
 
Although greatly influenced by Sigmund Freud (the founder of Psychoanalysis), Jung did not agree with all of Freud’s theories. He founded Analytical Psychology in 1913 after breaking with Freud. One of Jung’s theories was the classification of psychological personality types linked to four colours: red, blue, green and yellow. These colours were placed in a grid with X and Y axes.
 
X represents the line between Introversion and Extroversion,
 
Y represents the line between Thinking and Feeling.
 
This theoretical way of determining a person’s psychological type is now dismissed by today’s psychologists as it’s not based on any proven evidence of how our brains work. Personality is far more complex than Jung’s limited classification system can describe – which Jung also acknowledged himself.
 
However, Jung’s book Psychological Types (1921) was further developed in the 1940s by Katherine Cook Briggs and her daughter Isabel Briggs Myer (neither had formal training in psychology) into the Myers-Briggs 16 personality types, which also has colour associations and is a popular personality test that is still used today. It is important to note that there is no evidence that the Myers-Briggs personality test is an accurate or useful tool for determining a person’s personality, or success in career or life choices.
 
Art Therapy
 
Where Jung’s theories about colour and creativity have found greater practical use is in the emergence of art therapy as a field of practice that helps people deal with trauma and illness through creative work. Colour can be used effectively in art therapy as part of a process of expressing troublesome thoughts and feelings in a visual way.
 
Learn more from these online resources:
 
What color psychology really means
 
What is Art Therapy?
 
Hogan, Susan. Healing arts : the history of art therapy, London: Jessica Kingsley, 2001.
 
Hogan, Susan ed. Feminist Approaches to Art Therapy, Routledge 1997
 
More publications by Susan Hogan on Art Therapy
 
Why the Myers-Briggs test is totally meaningless 
 
 
 
Colour and medical therapy
 
Chromotherapy – therapy or quackery?
 
It is important to note that chromotherapy (colour therapy)  has been scientifically rejected due to a lack of evidence. It is regarded by the medical field as fraudulent and not having any measurable value.  It is mentioned here from a historic perspective only.
 
Light and colour have been used in many attempts at healing therapy since ancient times. There is evidence from Ancient Egypt, Greece and India of sunlight, coloured light and coloured materials claimed to be used for healing. The Persian scholar and philosopher Ib Sina (Avicenna)(c. 970–1037 CE) also promoted the idea of using colour for healing.
 
These practices formed the basis for later theories of chromotherapy by practitioners such as American physician Edwin D. Babbitt who developed a range of light therapies including a thermolume – a cabinet that was able to project coloured light onto various parts of the body. He also ‘irradiated’ water with sunlight filtered through coloured lenses. Dinshah Ghadiali was another inventor who claimed that colour therapy was the key to health. He invented a box with a 1000-watt light and coloured filters called a Spectro-Chrome which he claimed was able to produce twelve different colours to be used for different therapeutic purposes. He was labelled a fraud by the medical establishment of the day.
 

 
Figure 1.23. Image attribution Skin58, Blue Light acne phototherapy iClear, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
Phototherapy today 
 
Despite the debunking of these claimed ‘alternative’ therapies, there has been a recent rise in light therapy with the use of coloured LED lights for treatment of skin conditions such as acne or aging skin (Figure 1.23). The theory is that certain wavelengths of colour can promote healing and skin regeneration. Research in this area is recent and largely inconclusive. There are also concerns that incorrect use of these devices which have strong LED lights, may cause eye damage.
 
There is a type of evidence-based light therapy (phototherapy) for babies that may have Newborn Jaundice (Hyperbilirubinemia). These newborns are placed under a blue light (420–470 nm wavelengths) to treat the condition (Figure 1.24). The blue light helps to remove bilirubin from the blood. This kind of phototherapy has been used for many decades.
 

 Figure 1.24. Newborn Jaundice treatment with a “Bili-lite”. Image attribution: User Jeremykemp on en.wikipedia, Bili light with newborn, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Learn more from these online publications:
 
Edwin D Babbitt, The Principals of Light and Colour 1878, Babbitt and Co.
 
Quackwatch.org “Colourful Nonsense: Dinshah Gladioli and his Spectro-Chrome Device”
 
Harvard Health Publishing, Harvard Medical School, 2019, “LED lights: are they a cure for your skin woes?”
 

Mohr, C., & Jonauskaite, D. (2022, February 8). Why links between colors and emotions may be universal ... And the enduring debate over the meaning of red [Journal]. Psychology Today. https://www.psychologytoday.com/au/blog/color-psychology/202202/why-links-between-colors-and-emotions-may-be-universal ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-008-colour-symbolism.xhtml =====

Colour symbolism in different cultures

 

 

 
Symbolic colour meanings have been associated in art and anthropology with different cultural, spiritual or religious groups throughout our recorded history. In many ancient cultures, colour symbolism was related to the natural elements – earth, water, fire, air, etc.
 
For example, traditional Chinese colour symbolism associates the elements and primary colours shown in Table 1.2.
 

 Red (Zhusha Hong) = fire 
 

 Yellow (Ming Huang) = earth 
 

 White (Chun Bai) = metal 
 

 Black (Xuan Se) = water 
 

 Blue (Qing Se) = wood 
 
 
Table 1.2 Chinese colour symbolism
 
In other cultures, certain colours that were made from rare pigments were highly prized and thus came to have symbolic meaning. Here are two examples:
 
Tyrian purple
 
In ancient Roman culture, purple (Tyrian purple or Phoenecian red/purple) was a special colour reserved for the clothing of emperors and senators. This was because the vibrant purple dye was made from a particular species of sea snail (Murex or Muricidae) and it was expensive and very difficult to create.
 

 
Figure 1.25. Minerva as the goddess Roma. Image attribution: Dennis Jarvis from Halifax, Canada, Italy-0540 – Dress is not painted…. (5168496402), CC BY-SA 2.0
 
Deep red porphyry from Egypt (Imperial Porphyry) is an igneous rock that was also valued by the Romans because it was very close to Tyrian purple in colour. Figure 1.25, shows a statue of Minerva (as Goddess Roma) from Capitol Square in Rome (c 300 CE). Her dress is made from red porphyry to represent the Tyrian purple dye of imperial Roman clothing. (Read more about dyes in 3.4 Colour systems: pigments and dyes)
 
Ultramarine (lapis lazuli)
 
Blue was used symbolically in Christian religious imagery during the Renaissance – partly because the blue pigment was very rare. The cloak of the Virgin Mary was often coloured with ultramarine blue (Figure 1.26). The colour blue also represented the heavens and the celestial, so it had more than one symbolic meaning in this context.
 

 
Figure 1.26. Madonna del Cardellino by Raffaello Sanzio shows the Madonna with a blue cloak painted with ultramarine pigment. Image attribution: Raphael artist QS:P170,Q5597, Raffaello Sanzio – Madonna del Cardellino – Google Art Project, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Ultramarine pigment was made from a deep blue precious stone –lapis lazuli, said to be worth more than gold at the time. It has been claimed that Michelangelo couldn’t afford enough ultramarine blue for the Virgin’s cloak, and so never completed his painting The Entombment. 
 
Johannes Vermeer put his family in debt to acquire the pigment for his paintings such as The Milk Maid (Figure 1.27).
 

 
Figure 1.27. The Milk Maid by Johannes Vermeer. Image attribution: Johannes Vermeer artist QS:P170,Q41264, Johannes Vermeer – Het melkmeisje – Google Art Project, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Flags of the world
 
In contemporary international culture, we see symbolic colour all around us in fashion, products and media.  Flags of the world are also an obvious example of symbolic colour (Figure 1.28). Colours used in national flags have symbolic meanings related to a country’s culture and history.
 

 
Figure 1.28.  Flag-map of the world. Image attribution: Transparent 6lue, Flag-map of the world, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select image to enlarge.
 
Australian First Nation flags
 

Our Australian Aboriginal flag (Figure 1.29) has three colours in a design that represents:
 
the earth (red),
 
the people (black), and
 
the sun (yellow)
 

 
Figure 1.29. Australian Aboriginal Flag Image attribution: Aboriginal artist Harold Thomas (Vector graphics image by Trisreed), Australian Aboriginal Flag, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
The Torres Strait flag has the following colour symbolism:
 
Green – the mainlands (Papua New Guinea and Australia)
 
Black – the people of the Torres Strait Islands
 
Blue – the waters surrounding the islands
 
White Dhari – the Dhari is a traditional headdress made and worn by men. The white colour symbolises peace.
 
White Five-Pointed Star – the five major island groups and their ties to navigation by sea
 
View the Torres Strait Flag here (copyright permission to reproduce the flag must be obtained from the TSIRC).
 
 
Pride flags
 
Pride flags of the LGBTIQA+ community use colours symbolically to represent various groups.  There is one overarching rainbow flag for the whole community (Figure 1.30) (and a Progress Pride flag – Figure 1.31), but each subgroup also has their own flag with symbolic use of colour.
 

 
Figure 1.30. Pride flag. Image attribution: Philadelphia City Council and Tierney, Philadelphia Pride Flag, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
 
 

 
Figure 1.31. Progress pride flag. Image attribution: Paul2520, LGBTQ+ rainbow flag Quasar “Progress” variant, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Learn more about Pride flags and colour symbolism from these online resources:
 
Pride flag on Wikipedia
 
Understanding color psychology though culture, symbolism, and emotion
 
Color symbolism on Wikipedia
 
Cross-cultural color and emotion
 
Colour symbolism in Australian Indigenous culture
 

 
Figure 1.32. Image attribution: Aboriginal rock art in ochre colours, Graeme Churchard from Bristol (51.4414, -2.5242), UK, Aboriginal rock art on the Barnett River, Mount Elizabeth Station, CC BY 2.0
 
Traditional Australian Aboriginal artists used the materials at hand – ochres from the ground (Figure 1.32), plants and other substances used to make dyes.  Different language groups across the continent developed their own symbolic uses for colour to represent the earth, sky, animals, people, waters etc. There isn’t one set of meanings that covers the whole country, and some meanings and colour making methods may be protected knowledge of certain groups.
 
 
 

 
Figure 1.33. Luwaytini – digital artwork by Mark Cleaver. Image attribution: Luwaytini by Mark Cleaver, Palawa.
 
Since European colonisation, many Indigenous artists have embraced a wider range of colours in their work – partly due to the availability of ready-made paints, or the use of digital media. In particular, since the 1970s and the beginnings of painting movements by groups in central and western Australia, materials like acrylic paints have become popular because they are available in a variety of colours, are easy to use and quick to dry. Brighter colours have been incorporated into many Indigenous artists’ practices (Figure 1.33). These colours are symbolically used to represent the intensely coloured and vibrant features of diverse landscapes across the country. Learn more about pigments and dyes in Chapter 3 – Colour systems: paint pigments and dyes
 
Learn more about colour in indigenous culture from these resources:
 
Aboriginal Art Australia: The story of Aboriginal art
 
Japingka Aboriginal Art: How Aboriginal colours and group art styles develop
 
Kate Owen Gallery: Aboriginal-colours-in-art
 
RMIT News: Louisa Bloomer tree artwork
 
RMIT News: Mark Cleaver, Indigenous artwork Luwaytini

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-009-colour-and-language.xhtml =====

Colour and language

 

 

 
Naming colours
 

 
Figure 1.34. Image attribution: Homer, Odyssey manuscript. Date: 3rd quarter of the 15th century.

 File:Odyssey_manuscript.jpg photoshopped by Odysses, Odyssey-crop, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Research in the field of cognitive science over the last 150 years has included investigations into how language might influence thought and conversely, how thought might influence language. Many of the studies undertaken with different language groups around the world have analysed descriptions of colour as a way of testing these theories.
 
Some of this research has noted that many language groups have more descriptions for warmer colours (red, orange, purple) and less for cooler colours (blue, green, yellow).
 
Some language groups like those from Papua New Guinea don’t have separate words for blue and green, while others like Russian speakers have two words for blue (siniy [синий] – dark blue and goluboy [голубой] – light blue).
 
Studies also show that learning a new language alters your perception of colour.
 
It was speculated that in the past people couldn’t see the colour blue because there weren’t examples of words representing “blue” in ancient texts (Figure 1.34). An example of this proposition was made by politician and historian William Gladstone in his 1858 publication Studies on Homer and the Homeric Age[1] with regard to Homer’s texts The Iliad andThe Odyssey.
 
Gladstone noticed that Homer never described the sky or sea with a word that could mean “blue”, so he speculated that people from ancient times couldn’t see the same colours.
 
However, scientists have concluded that people from ancient times did see blue – they saw the same spectrum of colours that we can see now, but perhaps they didn’t differentiate between blue and green, or used different relational and descriptive words to describe colours like Homer’s “wine-looking sea”.  It was an issue of linguistics, not optics[2].
 
Colour Atlases
 
Around the time of Charles Darwin, descriptive language standards – also called taxonomies – for colour used by naturalists were published as ‘colour-atlases’[3] which described colours by hue and value based on natural objects such as plants, animals, and landscape features, not ‘spectral colours’ (colours such as red, blue, yellow, violet, green or orange). 
 
Darwin was said to have a copy of such an atlas – Werner’s Nomenclature of Colours Adapted to Zoology, Botany, Chemistry, Minerology, Anatomy and the Arts by Patrick Syme, 1821)(Figure 1.35), during his voyage on the Beagle[4] (1831-1836). This colour atlas book is still in print today.
 
 
 

 
Figure 1.35. A page from Werner’s Nomenclature of Colours: Greys. Image attribution: Werner, Abraham Gottlob, 1749-1817; Syme, Patrick, 1774-1845, editor; Blackwood, William, 1776-1834, bookseller; Cadell, Thomas, 1773-1836, bookseller; James Ballantyne and Co., printer, Werner’s nomenclature of colours: greys, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 

This method of colour classification using language standards came about because of the problem of making spectral colours with pigments and dyes at that time. See Chapter 3.4 Colour systems: paints and pigments for more information on pigments and dyes.
 
The way you think about colour may depend on your language even if we see the same spectrum of colours. Naming conventions in our language for colours may also influence how we think about colour.
 
If you’re an artist who uses common art materials, you might associate colour with the names of paint pigments like ‘Prussian Blue’, ‘Burnt Sienna’, ‘Alizarin Crimson’, or  ‘Cadmium Yellow’. If you’re a fashion designer, you might think about colour according to popular colours used in textiles such as denim or navy blue, khaki, charcoal grey, beige or fuschia.
 
Today, we have seemingly endless and non-standard ways of naming colours – some of them are strange or even humorous like these AI-generated colour names. Paint colour charts are good examples of this and they are easy to find online or in hardware stores. Descriptive language is used to classify, differentiate and market thousands of colours that have very slight variations between them.
 
What colour is “Elephant’s breath”? Or “Velvet dream”?

 What’s the difference between “Natural white” and ‘Antique white”?
 
Learn more from these resources:
 
SBS Culture: The way you see colour depends on what language you speak
 
MIT NEWS: Analyzing the language of color
 
Wikipedia: Linguistic_relativity
 
 
Colour idioms in English
 
What is an idiom? How do we use colour expressively in the English language?
 
An idiom is a phrase that uses figurative language to express an idea or concept. The meaning of an idiom is more than the words mean: it’s an extended meaning.
 

Seeing Red
 
The idiom “seeing red” is a good example: we don’t actually mean that we see the colour red, but we understand it to mean “being angry” because that’s how the phrase has developed meaning over time through common use.
 
 
The phrase “seeing red” now has its own meaning in the English language.  It might not have the same meaning in other languages (although some colour idioms can be similar across languages).
 
English has lots of colour-related idioms. Some relate to emotions and moods, but others are more descriptive.
 

Green fingers
 
Saying someone has “green fingers” or “a green thumb”, means they are good at gardening and growing plants.
 
 
Read this article for some common examples of colour idioms in English:
 

https://www.gutenberg.org/files/47356/47356-h/47356-h.htm ↵

Bellos, Alex, 2010, "Through the Language Glass: How Words Colour Your World by Guy Deutscher", The Guardian, 12/06/2010 ↵
 
(Gage, J. Colour and Meaning, Thames and Hudson, 2002, p.26 ↵

 Darwin, Voyages of the Adventure and Beagle, 1839 ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-010-colour-theory-in-culture-resources.xhtml =====

Colour theory in culture - resources

 

 

 
Here are some useful links to library subject guide resources and other online resources to further your research.
 
RMIT Library – Interior design subject guide
 
Books held at RMIT Library
 
John Gage, Color and Meaning: Art, Science, and Symbolism University of California Press – 1st edition, 2000
 
John Gage, Color and Culture: Practice and Meaning from Antiquity to Abstraction University of California Press – 1st edition, 1999
 
Color – Messages & Meanings: A PANTONE Color Resource, Paperback – November 29, 2006, by Leatrice Eiseman  (Author)
 
Pantone Guide to Communicating With Color, Paperback – October 16, 2000 by Leatrice Eiseman  (Author)

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-011-colour-aesthetics-in-art-and-design.xhtml =====

Colour aesthetics in art and design

 

 

 
Early Modern Art
 
Figure 1.37. Wheat field with crows, Vincent van Gogh, 1890.  Image attribution: Vincent van Gogh artist QS:P170,Q5582 Google Art Projectでのアーティストの詳細, Vincent van Gogh – Wheatfield with crows – Google Art Project, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Goethe, Chevreul and Ostwald (See 1.1 History of colour theories for more details) did not have an ongoing influence on colour theory from a scientific perspective. However, they did have a lasting influence through the works of artists who were concerned with colour aesthetics, psychological colour and subjective colour from the time of the Impressionist movement, through to the Abstract Expressionist and Colour Field painters of the 20th century.
 
 
 

Research and reflection activity:
 

It’s easy to find resources about early modern artists and their work with colour in art books and online publications.
 
Here is a small selection of significant artists from the Impressionist, Expressionist, Fauvist, Orphic Cubist, and Futurist movements that made significant contributions to the development of modern theories of colour in visual art.
 
Research three of the artists listed here – select artists’ names to open a Google search in a new browser tab, and learn more about them and their work with colour:
 
Claude Monet

 
 
George Seurat
 
Vincent van Gogh (Figure 1.37)
 
Paul Cezanne
 
Henri Matisse [1]
 
Andre Derrain
 
Sonia Delaunay
 
Robert Delaunay
 
Giacomo Balla
 
Umberto Boccioni
 
Do you have a favourite artist from this time?
 
How does colour play a role in their work?
 
Does understanding other artists’ creative practices help you to develop your own practice?
 
 
 
 
 
The Bauhaus influence
 
The Geman Bauhaus school (1919-1933) was an important site for experimentation and exploration of the aesthetics of colour and form, and how colour is subjectively perceived in different contexts.  The work done by key designers and artists associated with the Bauhaus school is still influential.
 
Practitioners listed below all taught colour curricula at the Bauhaus school. They all had their own ideas and theories about colour aesthetics. Select artists’ names to open a Google search in a new browser tab, and learn more about them and their work with colour:
 
Josef Albers
 
Anni Albers
 
Johannes Itten
 
Wassily Kandinsky
 
Paul Klee
 
 
 
Figure 1.38.Bauhaus cradle by Peter Kelley. Image attribution: Peter Keler artist QS:P170,Q2076225 (Ausführung) Wassily Kandinsky creator QS:P170,Q61064, Bauhauswiege DSC9004, CC0 1.0
 
The traditional primary colours: Red, Yellow and Blue, and the associated secondary and tertiary colours on the traditional colour wheel, formed the colour model used by Johannes Itten, Josef Albers[2] and others (Figure 1.38) as a basis for the Bauhaus colour curriculum, and for other schools influenced by the Bauhaus.
 
Albers and Itten both had a keen interest in colour relationships and how colours appear when placed side-by-side.
 
Color is changing continually: with changing light, with changing shape and placement, and with quantity which denotes either amount (a real extension) or number (recurrence). And just as influential are changes in perception depending on changes of mood, and consequently of receptiveness.[3]

 
 
 
 

Publications by Albers and Itten are still referred to in art schools today. You may find copies of these books in art and design school libraries (links open in new tabs):
 
Josef Albers, Interaction of Colour, Homage to the Square
 
Johannes Itten, The Art of Colour
 
 
 
 
Mid-century Modern: into the colour field
 
In the mid-20th century, artists associated with Abstract Expressionism, Colour Field painting and Post-painterly Abstraction were working without figurative elements, using colour as the main feature of their paintings. Select artists’ names to open a Google search in a new browser tab, and learn more about them and their work with colour:
 
Mark Rothko
 
Barnett Newman(Figure 1.39)
 
Kenneth Noland
 
Clyfford Still
 
Helen Frankenthaler
 
Frank Stella
 
These artists, and many others from the modern period, created significant artworks that have influenced creative practitioners of all kinds since that time. In the 21st Century, we continue to research and study these artists’ works because of their impact. Students of art and design can learn much from exploring their use of colour.
 

 
Figure 1.39. Who’s Afraid of Red, Yellow and Blue IV (1969/70) by Barnett Newman. Image attribution: Rino Porrovecchio from Palermo, Italy, Barnett Newman at Neue Nationalgalerie (2369586886), CC BY-SA 2.0
 
In Australia, there was a significant shift to abstract and colour field painting in the 1960s. The National Gallery of Victoria held an important and controversial exhibition titled “The Field” in 1968 which coincided with the launch of the new modernist gallery space in St Kilda Road (the current NGV International gallery).
 
This was a landmark exhibition which showcased the new work of young and emerging local Australian abstract artists. In 2018, this exhibition was re-staged at the NGV International space titled “The Field Revisited”. Read about it here in this ABC News article (link opens in a new tab), and visit the NGV website page (link opens in a new tab) to see examples of the abstract artworks and the artists that created them.
 
 
 

Research and reflection activity:
 

Research two of the artists working with abstraction listed in this section, and see if you can find two more artists from the NGV “The Field” exhibition.
 
Do you have a favourite abstract artist?
 
How does colour play a role in abstract painting?
 
How does understanding these artists’ creative practices help you to develop your own practice?
 
 
 
Note: the artists and designers listed on this page were not the only ones working with colour in new and experimental ways: this is an introduction to selected key figures in art and design. See linked resources and subject guides for more information on this topic.
 
Further resources:
 
Ball, V. K. (1965). The Aesthetics of Color: A Review of Fifty Years of Experimentation. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 23(4), 441–452. https://doi.org/10.2307/427666
 
David Briggs’ website The Dimensions of Colour (link opens in a new tab) contains extensive academic and scientific information about colour theory. These two sections are particularly relevant to this page as they discuss modern colour theory (links open in new tabs):
 
11.2 Traditional and modern colour theory part 1: Modern colour theory
 
11.3 Traditional and modern colour theory part 2: traditional colour theory strikes back!
 

also see Matisse's publication Notes d’un peintre, 1908 (English version)(opens link as a PDF file in a new tab) ↵

RMIT students can access this video on Albers: RM, A. (Producer), & Moritz, R. (Director). (2012). Josef Albers - Homage to the Square: Against Deep Blue. [Video/DVD] ArtHaus Musik. Retrieved from https://video.alexanderstreet.com/watch/josef-albers-homage-to-the-square-against-deep-blue ↵

quote by Josef Albers (Written ca. 1954 and published in numerous catalogues and articles and in various languages) ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-012-colour-correction-and-grading-in-photography-and-film.xhtml =====

Colour grading in photography and film

 

 

 

 
Figure 1.40. Image attribution: Metropolitan Print Company; Copyright 1896 by Raff & Gammon, Edison’s Greatest Marvel-The Vitascope – Restoration, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Since the beginnings of colour technologies in photography and film in the late 19th Century, attempts have been made to create realistic and accurate colour representation in photography and film.
 
Colour grading is the manipulation of colour to emphasise or de-saturate certain colours and adjust contrast, shadows and highlights. It is used to enhance the mood, emotion, or visual style of an image or film.
 
The practices of colour grading and colour correction began with traditional photography and film and continue to this day with digital media production.
 
For an overview of colour technologies in non-digital photography and film, Barbara Flueckiger’s website Timeline of Historical Film Colors (link opens in a new tab) is an extensive resource of over 250 individual film colour processes, from tinting and hand-colouring to contemporary colour film processes.
 
This page covers a selection of important developments in the production of colour photography and film:
 

Topics:
 

Technicolor
 
The history of photographic test cards and racial bias
 
Colour grading film for skin tones
 
Colour grading techniques in digital photography and film
 
 
 
Technicolor
 
You may have seen old movies that list Technicolor in their credits, such as The Wizard of Oz (1939, Victor Fleming, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayor) or The Red Shoes (1948, Michael Powell & Emeric Pressburger, The Archers).
 
Technicolor is a trademarked process for colour motion-picture that dates from 1932. The original process captured three black and white films at once using a very large and cumbersome camera with a light-splitting cube to capture red, green and blue light on each film. It then used a dye process to produce an opposite colour print – the red film becomes a cyan print, the green becomes a magenta print, and the blue becomes a yellow print. When the three colour films were laminated together, they reproduced something close to natural colour.
 
Watch this video for more details:
 
How Technicolor changed movies (Phil Edwards, Vox)
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=94#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: How Technicolor changed movies, Phil Edwards, Vox on YouTube
 
You can learn more about Technicolor from the Eastman online research archive (link opens in a new tab).
 
 
 
The history of colour photographic test cards and racial bias
 
In the 1950s, cameras and colour film became cheaper and more available for anyone to use. The companies that made photographic film and the printers that produced photographs from the negatives required methods for testing whether the colour was accurate and realistic. At that time, the Kodak company had a monopoly on colour film and photographic printing in the western world.
 
The method of colour testing for photographic printing used images of people (usually women) on the test cards to ensure skin tone was accurate. This was problematic because Kodak originally only used models with white skin as testing controls. This means that there was bias in the way colour film presented people with darker skin tones.
 
These test cards were known as “Shirley cards”, because that was the name of the original model used in the Kodak skin tone standard cards.
 
It wasn’t until the mid-1990s that Kodak developed a multiracial Shirley card, but this was partly because companies that manufactured chocolate and wooden furniture had been complaining for years that photographic prints weren’t showing enough variations in the dark brown tones of their products.
 
Fuji film became the film of preference for photographing darker skin tones at that time, possibly because their colour processing favoured a different range of skin tones.
 
Watch this video to learn more:
 
Colour film was built for white people. Here’s what it did to dark skin.
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=94#oembed-2 
 
 
Media attribution: Color film was built for white people. Here’s what it did to dark skin, Vox on YouTube
 
It is fair to say that early colour film and printing techniques didn’t have the same range of colour dynamics as we have now, and couldn’t produce the best skin tones across all skin types. However, it is evident that the way chemical processes were developed at the time favoured showing light skin tones more accurately than dark skin tones.
 
Learn more about this topic from artists Hito Steyerl and Rosa Menkman: Behind White Shadows (link opens in a new tab).
 
Colour grading film for skin tones
 
More recently in cinematography, colourists have developed digital colour grading techniques to better represent all skin types without losing quality or stylised colour effect.  Some significant examples of using colour grading in moving images to portray dark skin tones include the films Moonlight (2016, Barry Jenkins dir.) and Black Panther (2018, Ryan Coogler dir., Marvel Studios).
 
Watch the trailer here to see the different colour gradings used in this film:
 
Moonlight | Official Trailer
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=94#oembed-3 
 
 
Media attribution: Moonlight | Official Trailer HD, A24, on YouTube
 
Moonlight director Barry Jenkins engaged colourist Alex Bickel, to create a colour grade for the film that increased contrast and colour saturation while preserving detail. The three chapters of the film were designed to look like different film stocks:
 
Chapter 1 imitated the Fuji film stock to highlight the cast’s skin tones.
 
Chapter 2 imitated the Agfa film stock, which increased the cyan colour.
 
Chapter 3 imitated a modified Kodak film stock.[1]
 
Colour grading techniques in digital photography and film
 
You may have already used filters on your own digital media to adjust and enhance the colour of a photograph or video for social media or before you print it. Most image-capturing apps now have a range of colour filters that can immediately change the look of your image in many ways.
 
This is simple colour grading, and the same principle is applied to professional photography and film – although the processes can be much more technical and customised.  Almost all films and TV series have colour grading applied to them.  It can be surprising to see the original footage captured in the camera compared to how it looks post-production.
 

 
Figure 1.41. Colour grading example with increased saturation, contrast and blue/purple hues: before (left) and after (right). Image attribution: adapted from Forest. Morning. Fog. No filters or effects. Natural nature by MakZin
 
Colour grading in film and video is an art, and colourists are skilled in manipulating colour using a range of digital techniques.
 
Colour correction is not the same as colour grading. Colour correction involves fixing problems with the original captured imagery, like editing out skin blemishes or matching colour between different scenes in a video, for example. Colour grading is more about the overall colour and visual style of the image or video.
 
You might have noticed that some movies you watch have a lot of deep blue and green tones, while others might have orange and cyan tones, very black shadows, or very vibrant reds.  With colour grading, deliberate choices are made to adjust the hue, saturation, contrast, highlights and shadows of still or moving images to enhance drama or match visual themes.
 
All image and video editing applications currently used in the digital media industry have colour grading tools. Anyone working with digital photography and film can learn how to use these tools and apply colour grading to their digital media projects.
 

Activities:
 

Make a list of your three favourite films or TV drama series and analyse the colour grading in the video. It is likely that none of your choices are using film or video straight from the camera without any colour grading – unless you are watching a Dogma 95 film (link opens in a new tab). 
Are the colours similar or different in each of your selected videos?
 
Do certain types or genres (Action, Romance, Comedy, Sci-fi, Horror etc.) have the same colour style?
 
How does the colour add to your experience of what you are watching?
 
How can you improve your own images and videos with deliberate colour grading?
 
 
Explore the filters on your mobile device apps or the colour editing settings in your image or video editing software and experiment with adjusting the colour in your own photos and videos.
 
 
 
You can learn more about colour grading for video by doing these short LinkedIn Learning courses (free for RMIT students with login):
 
Creating a short film – 11 – color grading
 
Colour grading footage in-After-Effects
 
Introduction to video color correction – understanding color theory
 

O'Falt, C. 2016, "‘Moonlight’ Glow: Creating the Bold Color and Contrast of Barry Jenkins’ Emotional Landscape", IndiWire, 26/10/2016, <https://www.indiewire.com/2016/10/moonlight-cinematography-color-barry-jenkins-james-laxton-alex-bickel-1201740402/> accessed 10/11/2022 ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-013-colour-trends.xhtml =====

Colour trends and palettes

 

 

 
A trend is a direction that is developing or changing – as with fashion, which is constantly evolving. Colour trends are how we describe certain colours or colour palettes (selected groups of colours that are used together) that become popular at different times. Knowing about colour trends is useful in design fields like fashion and textile design, interior design, product and packaging design and web design, where new products are continuously emerging.
 
Commercial colour charts are easy to find for paints and textiles. In design, the Pantone Matching System (PMS) for graphics and print and the Pantone Fashion, Home and Interiors System (FHI) for textiles and pigments have become industry standards for colour selection for a wide range of design and commercial production solutions.
 
The Pantone Colour Institute has also become known for its colour trend influencing. They select a “colour of the year” each year.
 
The 2023 Colour of the Year is:
 
PANTONE

 18-1750

 Viva Magenta
 

 
Here are some past Pantone colours of the year (Table 1.3):
 

2022

 PANTONE

 17-3938

 Very Peri 

 2021

 PANTONE

 17-5104

 Ultimate Gray 

 
PANTONE

 13-0647

 Illuminating
 

 2020

 PANTONE

 19-4052

 Classic Blue 

 2019

 PANTONE

 16-1546

 Living Coral 

 
 
2018

 PANTONE

 18-3838

 Ultra Violet 

 2017

 PANTONE

 15-0343

 Greenery 

 2016

 PANTONE

 13-1520

 Rose Quartz 

 
PANTONE

 15-3919

 Serenity
 

 2015

 PANTONE

 18-1438

 Marsala 

 
 
2014

 PANTONE

 18-3224

 Radiant Orchid 

 2013

 PANTONE

 17-5641

 Emerald 

 2012

 PANTONE

 17-1463

 Tangerine Tango 

 2011

 PANTONE

 18-2120

 Honeysuckle 

 
 
 
Table 1.3 Pantone Colour of the Year 2011-2022
 
https://www.pantone.com/articles/past-colors-of-the-year (link opens in a new tab).
 
Aesthetics of colour palettes
 
A colour palette is a set of colours that a designer or artist chooses to work with on a project like an image, website, fashion range, product packaging etc.
 
Choosing the right set of colours can play an important role in how successful your design, artwork or product is and how users respond to it.
 
As previously discussed in this chapter, colour perception and aesthetic taste are subjective things, but colours do have common links to our emotions and moods. Any artist or designer will have their preferred palettes for working with specific projects. However, if you have a design brief from a client, you may need to create a unique colour palette for your client’s website or product. It can be difficult to know which colours work best together, and if those colours successfully symbolise or represent your client’s business.
 
Many online tools can recommend currently trending and aesthetically pleasing colour palettes or can help you create your own palettes by using keyword searches. Other online tools allow you to upload images to create a colour palette from the colours used in the image, or use AI to create colour palettes based on machine learning.
 

Activity:
 

Here are some online tools that can help you to create your own unique colour palettes for creative projects. Try them!
 
Colour palette generators (links open in new tabs)
 
https://www.canva.com/colors/color-palette-generator/
 
https://color.adobe.com/create/color-wheel
 
http://colormind.io
 
https://coolors.co
 
https://colors.muz.li
 
 
 
See Chapter 3.5 Colour wheels and relationships for more information on colour palettes and an interactive colour wheel.
 
Also, see Chapter 3.4 Pigments and dyes for examples of famous artists’ painting palettes.

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-014-light-electromagnetic-radiation.xhtml =====

Light: electromagnetic radiation

 

 

 
Light is a form of electromagnetic radiation.  We often talk about light as waves because light is made from energy that is radiated in a wave pattern, but light also has properties that are like particles. Sometimes light behaves like waves and sometimes it behaves like particles. This may sound confusing – it is!
 
Watch this video to learn more about the weird physics of light waves and particles (approximately 10 minutes).
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=228#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: Is Light a Wave or a Particle? – Ask a Spaceman, Paul M. Sutter on YouTube
 
You can also read the article here (opens in a new tab).
 
For Colour Theory, we refer to light as waves to describe how light forms different wavelengths that we see as colours. Wavelength is the distance between each wave of light energy – and as shown in Figure 2.3, it is measured in nanometres. A nanometre is one billionth of a metre, 0.000000001 or 10–9 metres.
 

Electromagnetic Spectrum (select image to enlarge)
 

 
Figure 2.3. Electromagnetic spectrum diagram. Image attribution: Full Electromagnetic Spectrum Information collection…By VectorMine on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
 
 
The energy of a light wave is similar to that of a particle moving at the speed of light. However, even the smallest particles would not be able to travel at such high speeds in reality.
 
The term photon is used to represent the smallest quantity of light from any wavelength. It’s also called a light quantum – an idea that began with Albert Einstein. The energy of a photon depends on the wavelength. Ultraviolet, X-rays and Gamma rays have the most energy and the shortest wavelengths.  Radio waves, Microwaves and Infrared have the lowest energy and the longest wavelengths. The visible spectrum sits in between these wavelengths and is only a small part of the whole electromagnetic spectrum.
 
Colour is how we define specific wavelengths in the visible spectrum. For example, red light has wavelengths from approximately 630 to 700 nanometres. Blue light wavelengths are approximately 450 to 500 nanometres. It’s difficult to say where one colour ends and another colour begins. Our definitions of colour by wavelength are based on our perception of colour with human eyes, and our classification of six main colours in the spectrum.
 

 

 
Figure 2.4. The visible spectrum diagram. Image attribution:  Spectrum, visible light diagram… By photoplotnikov on Adobe Stock, licenced to RMIT University (Education licence). Select image to enlarge.
 
 
 
Interesting Fact: Auroras
 

 
Figure 2.5. Aurora Borealis (Northern Lights), Alaska. Image attribution: United States Air Force photo by Senior Airman Joshua Strang, Polarlicht 2, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Auroras like the Aurora Borealis (Northern Lights) and Aurora Australis (Southern Lights) are natural phenomena that occur near the North and South Poles of the Earth.  Auroras are shimmering patterns of coloured lights that appear in the sky – usually in winter, when the sky is darkest at the poles.
 
Auroras are nothing like rainbows (which are caused by refraction), they are made from electromagnetic radiation (light) that is emitted when solar wind particles collide with charged particles in the earth’s outer atmosphere – the magnetosphere plasma. Sun events like coronal ejections can cause more of these disturbances.
 
Auroras can occur on satellites, comets, and on other planets.
 
Learn more about the physics of light and colour (opens in a new tab) and the history of theories of light (opens in a new tab).

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-015-optics.xhtml =====

Optics 1: lenses and ocular devices

 

 

 
What is Optics?
 
Optics is a branch of Physics – it’s the science that deals with light. Optics explains how light energy behaves and interacts with matter. Some of the earliest recorded experiments in optics were done by ancient Egyptians, Mesopotamians, and Greeks using glass lenses and reflective materials like obsidian.
 
During the Middle Ages and Enlightenment periods, the significant work of scientists Ibn al-Haythem (Book of Optics c1011) and Sir Isaac Newton (Opticks, 1704) made contributions to the field of optics with their observations of the visible spectrum and how light moves through different substances, as mentioned in Chapter 1.1 History of colour theories.
 
Other significant developments, such as Galileo’s refracting telescope (c.1609), also had a great impact on the fields of optics and astronomy. Since that time, many technological developments have expanded the field of optics to include both the visible and non-visible spectrum.
 
We use optics every day in so many aspects of our lives, including using our eyes to see. Optical glasses, mirrors, devices like cameras and digital devices, remote controls, microwave ovens, X-ray machines, microscopes that can show us cells and viruses up close, telescopes that explore the universe, optical fibre that gives us fast broadband internet, the solar panels we use to generate electricity – all these rely on technological innovations in optics.
 
Learning about optics is very useful for colour theory in science and creative fields such as art and design, because it has impacted many of the technologies we use in these fields. This page covers a selection of topics related to optics, many of which are used in creative and scientific practice:
 

 
Part 1. Selected technologies and innovations that come from the field of optics 

Lenses
 
Camera Obscura and Camera Lucida
 
Kaleidoscope
 
3D glasses
 
 
 

 
Lenses
 
A lens is an optical device usually made from transparent polished glass or plastic that focuses or disperses light depending on its shape. Light passing through the material of the lens is bent – that is, it changes direction depending on the shape and thickness of the lens. The word lens comes from the Latin for lentil because the biconvex (curving outwards on both sides) shape of a lens looks a lot like a lentil. However, not all lenses are biconvex, some are biconcave (curving inwards on both sides) or combinations of convex and concave. Biconvex lenses focus light, whereas biconcave lenses disperse or spread light (see Figure 2.6).
 

 
Figure 2.6. Examples of simple convex and concave lenses which can focus or disperse light. Image attribution: Large convex lens and Concave lens images released under the GNU Free Documentation License.
 
The most common lenses used in optical eyeglasses are meniscus lenses, which are convex-concave lenses that are customised to suit each individual’s vision requirements.
 
Lenses are in many devices we use every day, such as eyeglasses, magnifying glasses, cameras, telescopes, microscopes, etc.
 
Learn more about lenses (link opens in a new tab).
 
 
 
Camera Obscura and Camera Lucida
 

 
Figure 2.7. Camera Obscura engraved drawing. Image attribution: James Ayscough, 1755 james ayscough, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
A Camera Obscura (Latin for dark chamber) is a dark space used to create an image projection.  It works with a room, tent or box which has a very small hole or lens on one side that projects an image from the outside of the space to the opposite wall on the inside of the space (Figure 2.7). The projected image is upside-down and back-to-front because light bouncing off objects outside the Camera Obscura enters the internal space through the hole or lens at an angle. Light from an object at the top-left of a scene outside the camera, will project onto the bottom-right of the inner wall of the camera.
 
The concept behind the Camera Obscura led to the development of the photographic camera – which is where the name comes from. Cameras we use today still work on the same principle as this device, which was created many hundreds of years ago.
 
Some historians speculate that prehistoric cave paintings may have been inspired by accidental Camera Obscura effects from small holes in tents or animal hides. The Camera Obscura was most notably used as an artist’s device during the Renaissance and later periods of realism in painting to assist in the depiction of realistic scenes and accurate perspective in artworks.  There are records of its use in ancient Chinese, Arabic and European cultures as a means of telling the time of day and year by the position of the sun inside the camera. It was also used to safely view phenomena like solar eclipses, which can cause eye damage if viewed directly.
 
Jump to Activities at the bottom of the page to learn how to create your own Camera Obscura Pinhole Camera box with a cardboard box, or turn your entire room into a Camera Obscura.
 

 
Figure 2.8. Camera Lucida diagram. Image attribution: Unknown author, Camera Lucida in use drawing small figurine, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
A Camera Lucida (Latin for light chamber) is a portable device that was developed after the Camera Obscura. The technology may have existed in the 17th century, but it wasn’t patented until 1806. A Camera Lucida creates an optical illusion, where the scene in front of the artist is superimposed onto paper, which is usually on a flat surface like a table. The artist is able to look down into the device, which uses glass, a one-way mirror, or a prism, and see both the image of the scene in front of them, and the drawing on the paper combined together. See Figure 2.8 which shows a diagram of how a Camera Lucida is used.
 
The artist can then trace the superimposed image (which is an illusion created by the device) and create an accurate representation of the scene with correct proportions and perspective on the paper below. It was much easier to use than the Camera Obscura because it didn’t require a darkened space, and you could use it anywhere in any light conditions.  The technology of the Camera Lucida is similar to that used in microscopes that use mirrors to reflect the contents being viewed up into a lens that magnifies the image.
 
Artists used both of these technologies to assist in the depiction of realistic scenes in paintings and other art forms. Camera Lucida devices were also used by biologists and naturalists to create scientific illustrations.
 
Artist David Hockney wrote a controversial book where he claimed that many famous Old Master artworks were, in fact, created with optical devices like these. Some art historians were upset by this claim – they thought that Hockney was accusing the Old Masters of ‘cheating’ because of the suggestion that the artists hadn’t recreated the scenes in the paintings by eye alone. This implied that these Old Masters were less technically skilled than previously thought.
 
Along with physicist Charles M. Falco, Hockney claimed that many of the developments in realistic painting from the time of the early Renaissance (c.1430) were due to the technological development of optics devices. This is known as the Hockney-Falco Thesis. They didn’t consider using optical devices as ‘cheating’, rather they considered it part of the set of tools and devices artists could use in their work. Artists still require skill in painting techniques and visual style to create great masterpieces.
 
Hockney, David (2006). Secret Knowledge: Rediscovering the Lost Techniques of the Old Masters. Thames and Hudson. ISBN 9780500286388 (link opens in a new tab).
 
This video explores some of Hockney and Falco’s claims:
 
 
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=234#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: A History of how Optics Has Helped Artists Create Better Paintings, Inside Science, on YouTube
 
 
 
Kaleidoscope
 

 
Figure 2.10. Example of the view looking through a kaleidoscope with coloured glass beads. Image attribution: Albarubescens, Rotational symmetries in designs produced by a kaleidoscopeDSCN2440, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
How does it work?
 
Kaleidoscopes were first invented as toys in 1816 by Scottish physicist Sir David Brewster, but they can also be useful devices for designers and artists because they create complex and colourful symmetrical patterns. A kaleidoscope is usually made from a tube with angled mirrors inside of it that reflect light waves. Light usually travels in straight lines, but if it hits a shiny surface like a mirror, the light waves bounce back at a similar angle – like a bouncing ball.
 
Some kaleidoscopes have bits of coloured glass, beads or shiny objects inside them, so when you look into the tube, you see interesting geometric patterns made from these colourful objects and the reflected light from the mirrors (Figure 2.10).  Other kaleidoscopes have lenses in them that bring light from outside objects into the kaleidoscope, and the patterns are made from the image you are viewing through the kaleidoscope tube.
 
If you rotate the kaleidoscope while looking through it, you can change the coloured pattern by shifting the coloured objects around or changing the light that the mirrors are reflecting.
 
You can now install mobile device apps that simulate a kaleidoscope effect using your camera or coloured geometric patterns, and you can save these images to use in creative projects.  You can also get kaleidoscopic lenses that can be placed over a camera lens which add interesting patterns to a photographic image.
 
Learn more about kaleidoscopes from this text: The kaleidoscope, its history, theory and construction with its application to the fine and useful arts by Sir David Brewster, 1858on the Internet Archive. (link opens in a new tab)
 
View Activities below to make your own Kaleidoscope.
 
 
 
3D glasses
 
Why do we have two eyes?
 
We have evolved to have two eyes (binocular vision), perhaps partly because there is less risk of total blindness if one eye is damaged. But have you ever thought about how we have two eyes but only see one image?  The way our eyes work with our brains allows us to see in 3 dimensions (3D), and this is very useful for judging distances between objects and spatial navigation in the world.
 
More on human vision in 2.3 The human eye – how we see colour.
 
Stereoscopic photography
 
Binocular vision has also led to technological developments that try to replicate our 3D vision using different devices. The earliest experiments with this were with stereoscopic photography, where two photographic images were captured at a small distance from each other (similar to the distance between human eyes). These two photographs were placed in a viewer so that each eye views a different image (Figure 2.11). The brain interprets this information as a single image, and it appears that we are looking at a 3-dimensional scene.
 

 
Figure 2.11. Example of a stereograph image depicting someone viewing a stereograph image through a stereoscope. Image attribution: Underwood & Underwood, Stereograph as an educator, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select image to enlarge.
 
Anaglyph 3D – red/blue 3D glasses 
 
A similar principle is used with the Anaglyph 3D technique, which overlays two images of different colours that are slightly apart. Usually, one image is red, and the other is cyan (Figure 2.12). To view this kind of image in 3 dimensions, you need special glasses with different coloured transparent filters for each eye.
 
The eye looking through the red filter only sees the cyan image (as a black image), and the eye looking through the cyan filter only sees the red image (as a black image). This is because these two colours are opposites and their light waves do not pass through the filter of the opposite colour.
 
The effect is the same as the stereoscope because the brain interprets these two images as one, which appears as a 3-dimensional scene.
 

 
Figure 2.12. Anaglyph image for red-cyan 3D glasses. Image attribution: John Johnston from Glagow, Scotland, Hammer anaglyph (14656149338), CC BY-SA 2.0
 
RealD 3D
 
RealD 3D cinema technology is a polarised 3D system that uses circularly polarised light to create stereoscopic image projection. The principle for the polarising glasses we wear now for viewing 3D cinema is the same principle as the original stereoscope – the film we are viewing is actually two sets of moving images projected with a special projector that alternates right-eye frames and left-eye frames, switching between them 144 times per second.
 
These separate projections for each eye are made with a special polarising screen that switches the polarisation, so each eye only sees the frames that match the polarisation of the glasses. This is what gives us a realistic 3D effect (Figure 2.13).
 

 
Figure 2.13. Two pairs of RealD 3D cinema glasses demonstrating polarising effect. Image attribution: Fritz Jörn at English Wikipedia, TwoRealDglassesblackening, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
 
 

Activities
 

Pinhole camera – make your own Camera Obscura box
 
You can make one with any cardboard box:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=234#oembed-2 
 
 
Media attribution: How to make a Pinhole Camera, George Eastman Museum on YouTube
 
or watch this video to learn how to turn your room into a Camera Obscura:
 
 
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=234#oembed-3 
 
 
Media attribution: How to Turn a Room into a Camera Obscura, George Eastman Museum, on YouTube
 
And this video will show you how kaleidoscopes are made – you can make your own using a cardboard roll, clear plastic and reflective cardboard instead of mirror glass.
 
 
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=234#oembed-4 
 
 
Media attribution: How It’s Made: Kaleidoscopes, Science Channel, on YouTube
 
 
 
Learn more here about the history of optics (link opens in a new tab).
 
Visit Optics 2: electronic technologies and spectral analysis to see more examples of technologies that use optics such as lasers, optical fibre, photovoltaic cells, and spectral analysis in astronomy.

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-016-optics-part-2.xhtml =====

Optics 2: electronic technologies and spectral analysis

 

 

 
Learning about optics is very useful for colour theory in science and creative fields such as art and design, because it has impacted many of the technologies we use in those fields. This page covers a selection of topics related to optics, many of which are used in creative and scientific practice:
 
This is part 2 of two pages covering selected technologies from the field of optics. See Optics 1: lenses and ocular devices for an introduction to the topic, and examples of technologies such as lenses, camera obscura, camera lucida, kaleidoscopes and 3D glasses.
 
Part 2. Selected technologies and innovations that come from the field of optics 

Laser
 
Optical fibre
 
Photovoltaic cells
 
Spectral analysis in astronomy
 
 
 
Laser
 
How is it different to normal light?
 
Albert Einstein’s paper On the Quantum Theory of Radiation (1917) theorised the physics of lasers long before they were first created and used in 1960 by American engineer Theodore Harold Maiman.  The word LASER is, in fact, an acronym: Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation. A laser light is different from a common light devices because it is a coherent light source – which means that a laser can be a very narrow spectrum of light – only one colour (temporal coherence) that can be focused on a very small spot (spatial coherence). This is unlike other lights, which have a broader spectrum and radiate out in multiple directions. Lasers can be very powerful because of this coherence. An example of this is laser cutting technology, which uses a very powerful beam of light to heat very small areas of materials like metal or wood to melting or burning point – which “cuts” the material very precisely.
 

 
Figure 2.9. Example of six different types of laser. Image attribution: 彭家杰, LASER, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
How does it work?
 
A laser is made with a tube that is filled with some type of gas, liquid or crystal material. The tube has mirrors at both ends, but one of the mirrors is partially transparent to allow some of the light to pass through it.
 
Energy is applied to the material in the tube – this could be a powerful light source, or some other source of energy like gamma rays. This energy also causes the material in the tube to produce light (photons) by exciting the atoms inside it. The photons bounce back and forth between the mirrors at the ends of the tube, which creates more photons.  Some of these photons escape the tube through the mirror that is partly transparent, and this is what makes a laser beam (Figure 2.9). Light from a laser travels in a straight line and doesn’t get weaker the further it gets from its source, unlike radiant light. This makes it very useful across long distances.
 
Lasers are used in lots of ways – in industrial and commercial processes such as in cutting tools, barcode scanners, and laser printers – or at home in optical disc players like DVD and Blu-ray,  laser pointing tools, etc.
 
Learn more about lasers here (link opens in a new tab).
 
 
 
Optical fibre

 
 

 
Optical fibre is made from very thin, transparent fibres of glass (silica) or plastic that are a tenth of the thickness of a human hair. These fibres are able to transmit light from one end to another very efficiently by bouncing photons along the length of the fibre. 
 
The photons don’t escape from the fibre because of a phenomenon called total internal reflection – the photons bounce off the walls at an angle and keep bouncing along until they reach the end of the fibre. Optical fibres are also covered in a different layer of glass cladding that helps keep the light inside the optical fibre tube until it reaches the end (Figure 2.14).
 
 
 
Figure 2.14. Optical fibres.  Image attribution: BigRiz, Fibreoptic, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
This technology can be used as a form of lighting, and is very useful in lighting small spaces that are difficult to access, such as in medical procedures. You can view internal organs with optical fibre cables without having to cut a body open (Endoscopy). This method of light transmission is also used for telephone calls and to send data across the Internet (Broadband) through specially developed fibre optic cables that can transmit very large quantities of information very quickly by encoding data in pulses of light.
 
Optical fibre is a better material than traditional copper wire for transmitting data for a number of reasons:
 
there is less signal loss than wire – which means fewer amplifiers are needed to carry data long distances
 
there is no electromagnetic interference from other cables – which can happen with copper wire
 
it has a higher bandwidth – fibre optic cables can carry a lot more data than equivalent copper wires.
 
Learn more about optical fibre (link opens in a new tab).
 
 
 
Photovoltaic cells – solar electricity generation
 

 
Figure 2.15. A silicon photovoltaic cell. Image attribution: Radiotrefoil, Silicon heterojunction solar cell, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
A photovoltaic cell (PV cell) (or solar cell) is a special type of semiconductor that converts visible light into direct current (DC) electricity. Some PV cells can also convert infrared or ultraviolet radiation into DC electricity. Solar electric systems like the panels we put on our roofs for electricity and hot water, or the little grey squares that power small devices like garden lights, use PV cells to generate power that can be used immediately or stored in a battery for later use (Figure 2.15).
 
In simple terms, a PV cell is made from two layers of crystalline silicon – one layer is positively charged, and the other is negatively charged. When photons enter the layers of the cell, this generates a flow of electrons from the atoms in the cell material, creating an electrical charge of DC electricity. For solar panels in our homes, the DC electricity is changed into alternating current (AC) electricity by an inverter device.
 
Learn more about photovoltaic cells and how they work (link opens in a new tab).
 
 
 
Spectral analysis in astronomy
 

 
Figure 56. Anglo-Autralian telescope at Siding Springs Observatory. Image attribution: Ahilan Parameswaran, Anglo-Australian telescope at Siding Springs Observatory, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
A spectrometer is a very useful device in astronomy. It splits lightwaves into different parts of the spectrum, which can then be measured and analysed to find out what planets, stars, galaxies and other celestial bodies are made of – even at great distances. It can also detect the speed and direction of their movement. This is called spectral analysis.
 
In 1868 a spectroscope was used to detect helium for the first time by using a prism to spread out light from the sun. An unusual yellow line was observed in this prism which was determined to be helium.
 
Learn more about spectral analysis from this CSIRO resource (link opens in a new tab).
 
Learn more here about the history of optics (link opens in a new tab).

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-017-why-are-things-different-colours.xhtml =====

Why are things different colours?

 

 

 
Why do different objects we see around us appear to be different colours?
 
Objects themselves do not create colour (unless they have luminescence – see this section in the Chemistry chapter for more details). What they do is reflect and absorb the spectrum of light waves in different amounts – which includes light waves outside of the human visible spectrum.
 

 
For example: a tomato appears to be red because it’s absorbing most of the blue, green and other colour light waves (taking those photons into its atoms) and reflecting red light waves out (Figure 2.17). This is what we detect with our eyes and process with our brains. If it’s night-time and there is no light shining on the tomato, it doesn’t appear red because there are no light waves reflecting off it. The tomato is not generating its own colour. The red colour we see in a tomato comes from a chemical called Lycopene which is a bright red pigment found in other red fruits too. Lycopene absorbs certain light waves and reflects red – this is what we see when we look at a tomato in the light.
 
Figure 2.17. Tomato with light waves reflecting red light. Image attribution: Lisa Cianci, adapted from tomato isolated by Tim UR on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
It’s the structure of molecules that objects are made of that determines which light waves are absorbed and which are reflected. The electrons within those molecules have energy states that determine which types of energy they can absorb and reflect.
 
See Additive and subtractive colour systems in this resource for more information
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
The reason that most plants and tree leaves are green is because of a pigment called chlorophyll which is used for photosynthesis. Photosynthesis requires red and blue light waves that the plant transforms into chemical energy. The plant doesn’t need the green light waves so this is reflected out and that’s what our eyes detect (Figure 2.18).
 
Figure 2.18. Plant with light waves reflecting green light. Image attribution: adapted from Monstera deliciosa leaf or Swiss cheese plant in white pot by Dewins on Adobe Stock, licences to RMIT University (Education licence)
 

 
Some plants have flowers that reflect lightwaves humans can’t see – like ultraviolet (Figure 2.19).  However, certain insects and birds can see these light waves as colours and are attracted to the flowers as a source of food, which also pollinates the plants, or spreads their seeds so they can propagate. The plants have evolved to use this light-reflecting ability to assist their development, just like the insects and birds have evolved the ability to see ultraviolet light waves to assist their growth too.
 
This website Flowers in Ultraviolet by Bjørn Rørslett (link opens in a new tab), has a very detailed list of flower images showing how they look to humans and how they would look if we could see ultraviolet light waves.
 

 
Figure 2.19. Mimulus flower photographed in visible light (left) and ultraviolet light (right) showing a dark nectar guide visible to bees but not to humans. Image attribution: Plantsurfer, Mimulus nectar guide UV VIS, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
See How animals see colour in this resource for more information.
 
Gemstones
 

 
Figure 2.20. Gemstones in a range of colours. Image attribution: Arpingstone, Gem.pebbles.800pix, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Just like all other objects, gemstones absorb and reflect light waves and we perceive the reflected waves as different colours (Figure 2.20).  Rubies are red and emeralds are green because of the atomic structures of their elements, including impurities that are also mixed in.
 
To some extent, the colours of gemstones seem to correspond with where they lie on the periodic table of elements. This corresponds with the behaviour of electrons in their atoms. For example, diamonds are made of carbon – which is on the first level of the periodic table – and these elements are usually colourless. Coloured diamonds are due to impurities and imperfections in the stone such as traces of nitrogen, sulphur or boron.
 
Learn more about gemstone colour from the Gem Society’s Gemology page (link opens in a new tab).

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-018-colorimetry-spectophotometry.xhtml =====

Spectrophotometry and colorimetry

 

 

 

 
Figure 2.22. Beckman Ir-1 Spectrophotometer, c. 1941. Image attribution: Chemical Heritage Foundation, Beckman Ir-1 Spectrophotometer, ca. 1941, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Spectrophotometers and Colorimeters are both used to accurately measure colour, which is important in some scientific processes and also for matching colours for commercial production of products where colour accuracy is essential. They are both complex devices that are used in many areas of chemistry – and biochemistry in particular. Both use light and a solution (liquid) to measure the absorption of light.
 
A Spectrophotometer (Figure 2.22) measures the reflection and intensity of light for all colours – including those colours that aren’t part of the visible spectrum. It measures the exact wavelengths of light – not just the primary colours, by passing a beam of light through a diffraction grating which splits the light into different wavelengths.  A spectrophotometer is used to detect the purity of substances, to detect DNA and RNA concentrations in a sample, and lots of other biomedical analytics.
 
A Colorimeter (Figure 2.23) measures how much of a particular colour from the visible spectrum is in a solution by shining light through coloured filters or shining LED lights through the liquid. The device then measures how much of each colour is absorbed. It measures the three additive primaries (RGB) of coloured light. It can be used for blood analysis, detecting soil and food nutrients, chemical reaction levels, monitoring bacteria growth in biological experiments, etc.
 
Learn more about both devices (link opens in a new tab).
 

 
Figure 2.23. Colorimeter. Image attribution: Sonal Shinde, Colorimeter, CC BY-SA 4.0

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-019-metamerism-when-colours-seem-to-change-in-different-light-sources.xhtml =====

Metamerism - colour perception and matching

 

 

 

 
Figure 2.24 Dark room interior with two light sources. Image attribution: Dark contemporary waiting room interior with wooden sideboard by denisismagilov on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
If you work in fashion, interior design or any industry where colour matching is very important, it is useful to understand the concept of colour metamerism and how it can affect the colours you use, how you display objects, products, and creative works, and how you use lighting in different environments.
 
Have you ever decided to wear all black clothes that look the same colour in your bedroom, but when you go outside, you notice they are all slightly different? Some black garments are more reddish-black, others slightly more green or blueish-black?
 
Have you ever chosen a carpet or paint for your home that you thought would match your furniture, but once you have it in your home, it looks completely different? It might also appear to be different colours between day and night, or on sunny or overcast, cloudy days.
 
These are examples of Metamerism, or in fact, illuminant metameric failure.  The light in your home can be different colours from room to room and also a different colour to the sunlight outside. Some colours look the same under certain light sources but different under other light sources, which can include incandescent, fluorescent, LED or sunlight.
 
We could also say that colour blindness is a form of metamerism – observer metameric failure – because people see colour differently depending on their biology and the functionality of their eyes – as outlined in the sections on colour blindness and vision difference in this resource.
 
This also relates to the difference in colour on digital screens.  You might design a website with a very specific colour palette, but you can’t guarantee that everyone who views your website will have a screen that is properly calibrated to accurately show the colours you selected. You can test whether your computer or mobile device is “colour blind” by following some of the steps on this website: Is Your Computer Color Blind? (link opens in a new window).
 
How does Metamerism work?
 
Metamerism is the term we use when colours match under one lighting condition but not another. Colours that do match in this way are called metamers. It’s based on the science of how different coloured substances absorb and reflect light, the amount of electromagnetic radiation, and which wavelengths of the visible spectrum are reflected or emitted.
 

A practical example of a colour metamer is using two different methods of creating orange paints that appear to be identical
 

You can create an orange paint by:
 
mixing red and yellow paint pigments to create what the eye perceives as orange
 
using a ready-made orange paint pigment that was made with different chemicals to the red and yellow pigments.
 
Your eyes will see the same colour even though the two oranges were created with completely different pigments that reflect slightly different light wavelengths.
 
 
 
 
 
When colours that should be the same don’t match under different lighting conditions and are perceived differently, this is metameric failure. Some colours are more prone to metameric failure such as whites, greys, beiges, blacks, pinks and mauves. This is where the science of colorimetry becomes important for testing colour consistency and the specific wavelengths of light reflected or emitted.
 
How to prevent metameric failures (colour mismatches)
 
If you are choosing fabrics for a fashion collection and you want them to match, you should collect swatches and samples of fabrics and accessories that will go together in an outfit or ensemble and lay them out under different lights to make sure they match and look good together.
 
For example, you might think you have the perfect matching zip, buttons, sewing thread and bias binding for a cotton dress, but these items are made from different materials (nylon, plastic and metal) to the cotton dress fabric. They might look the same in one type of light, but if you look at them under a different light source, they might reflect different amounts of light wavelengths and appear different to your eyes.
 
This is because the dyes and pigments colouring these materials may have slight chemical differences and therefore reflect light differently.
 
 
 

 
Figure 2.25 Example of a selection of red items used in dressmaking. Image attribution: Sewing items border with Scissors and Thread by BillionPhotos.com
 
For the same reason, if you are decorating a house, it’s a good idea to try sample paint pots or get carpet and fabric samples and put them on the floor or walls to make sure you have the right colour for the environment and where the light falls. You also need to check if the colours match under daylight from the windows and under the artificial lights in your home.
 
With digital media, it’s impossible to know if your viewers have screens that are calibrated. It can help to test your website on as many different types of screens and, if possible, older technology, where screens might not work that well or may not have good brightness and contrast.  This way, you will know if your colour designs will look good under different conditions that are out of your control. You could also encourage your audience to take the computer colour blindness test mentioned above.

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-020-luminescence.xhtml =====

Luminescence

 

 

 

 
Figure 2.26 Fluorescent minerals. Image attribution: Fluorescent minerals (Hgrobe 06:16, 26 April 2006 (UTC)) – credit: Hannes Grobe/AWI, Fluorescent minerals hg, CC BY-SA 2.5
 
Luminescence is the term we use to describe when substances spontaneously emit light. It’s also described as “cold radiation” because it can happen to substances that aren’t heated.
 
There are many different kinds of luminescence, and you may already know some of them because they are quite common.  Here are a few examples of luminescence and how they work:
 
Photoluminescence – resulting from absorption of photons
 
Fluorescence: photons immediately radiate visible light when ultraviolet light waves hit a fluorescent substance. Examples include fluorescent paint pigments, textiles, fluorescent lights, and blacklight inks and dyes that glow when you shine an ultraviolet light on them (Figure 2.27).
 
Phosphorescence: when a phosphorescent substance is exposed to short wavelengths of light (high energy), it glows by absorbing the light and emitting it at a longer wavelength (low energy). Photons may radiate for a prolonged period of time after the light source is removed. Glow-in-the-dark toys and paints are good examples of this.
 
What is the difference between fluorescence and phosphorescence? Phosphorescent substances continue to emit photons for a longer period of time after the light source is removed, whereas fluorescent substances tend to emit photons for a shorter time.
 

 
Figure 2.27. Fluorescent clothes that glow with UV blacklight. Image attribution: Black light theatre Prague, Black light theatre Prague HILT 13, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
Chemiluminescence – from chemical reactions
 
Glow sticks are a good example of chemiluminescence. When you crack a glow stick, two chemicals are mixed together that produce a reaction. This reaction excites electrons in the atoms and they emit photons. This reaction is only temporary and you can’t “recharge” a glow stick. You can only create this chemical reaction once.
 
Bioluminescence is a form of chemiluminescence. Marine creatures, fireflies, algae (Figure 2.28), bacteria and other types of organisms that glow in the dark create light through chemical reactions that occur in their bodies. It happens when a light-emitting molecule reacts with a certain type of enzyme that the animal produces. Learn more about bioluminescence.
 

https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/app/uploads/sites/42/2022/11/Surfing_on_bioluminescent_wave.webm 
Figure 2.28. Video: surfing waves with bioluminescent algae bloom. Media attribution: Bioluminescent algae (Lingulodinium polyedra) bloom in San Diego by Timothy R Fallon, on Wikimedia Commons
 
Electroluminescence – from passing an electric current through a substance
 
LEDs (Light Emitting Diodes) are semiconductor devices that emit light when an electric current is passed through them. The colour of LED lights depends on the amount of energy passed through the semiconductors, which then determines the energy of the photons. Different amounts of energy produce different light wavelengths and therefore different colours (Figure 2.29). White light LEDs are created by using multiple semiconductors or a layer of light-emitting phosphors on the semiconductor device. It’s a combination of fluorescence and electroluminescence. While it is possible to create white light from red, green and blue LEDs, this isn’t the best method for colour rendering as only a narrow band of light wavelengths is used. The first LEDs emitted low-intensity infrared light. Visible and ultraviolet light LEDs were developed later.
 

 
Figure 2.29. Red green and blue LEDs. Image attribution: R, G, and B LEDs [7]. by PiccoloNamek, Uploaded to English Wikipedia under GDFL-self (GNU Free Documentation Licence) by the author
 
Radioluminescence – light produced by bombardment with ionising radiation
 
Radioluminescence happens when light is generated from a substance that is bombarded with ionising radiation, such as alpha particles, beta particles, or gamma rays. Dials on watches and clocks that glow in the dark are made from luminous paint containing the radioactive substance Radium (Figure 2.30).
 
Radium paint is a toxic substance and it created serious health problems for those who worked with it to create watch, clock and instrumentation dials. See Problematic colours in this resource for more information about the Radium Girls who worked in the factories that produced these radium dials.
 
Radium-based paints were replaced with Promethium and Tritium later in the 20th century as they have much lower radiation, making them safer to use.
 

 
Figure 2.30. Radium clock dial from the 1950s. Image attribution: Arma95, Radium Dial, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Mechanoluminescence – physical pressure applied to substances like crystals
 
Piezoelectricity: the devices that light gas stoves, grillers and some lighters use piezo ignition (Figure 2.31). This mechanoluminescence works when pressure is applied to a PZT crystal (lead zirconate titanate) with a small hammer, which produces a sudden high voltage and generates an electric spark that ignites the gas.
 

 
Figure 2.31. A Piezo ignition device. Image attribution: Petteri Aimonen, Piezo igniter, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
There are many other kinds of luminescence not included in this resource. Learn more here (link opens in a new tab).

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-021-colour-applications-in-chemistry.xhtml =====

Colour chemistry 1: animals that can change colour

 

 

 

 
Figure 2.32 Blue ringed octopus. Image attribution: The Deadly Blue Ringed Octopus by Viks_jin on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
There are many ways that colour is involved in chemical processes. Some of these processes occur naturally – as with certain animals that can change their colour by cell signalling (Figure 2.32). Some processes are used for medical diagnostic tests that help to keep us healthy – like COVID tests. Other processes are used to measure chemical substances and reactions in laboratories, for creative purposes like photography and making art materials, or simply for entertainment like fireworks.
 
The four pages in this section explain some examples of colour processes in chemistry with links to further information, and practical learning activities that are simple science experiments you can do at home.
 
Animals that can change their colour
 
Only animals classed as Ectotherms are able to change their colour. An ectotherm cannot generate its own body heat like mammals and birds. This group of animals includes reptiles, frogs, cephalopods (including species of squid, octopus, cuttlefish, and nautilus), insects, crustaceans and fish. Colour changes happen because of how light is absorbed and reflected by the chemical pigments in the cells of these creatures.
 
Reasons for the ability to colour change are mainly to camouflage and protect the animal from dangers such as predators, to assist with hunting prey, or to communicate warning and mating signals to other creatures. Colour change can also help an animal regulate its body temperature. For example: a lizard may be able to change to a darker colour that absorbs more lightwaves from the sun to warm itself.
 
There are different types of colour change in ectotherm animals, and these can be triggered by different processes in chromatophores (cells that can produce colour). Some of these processes are physiological – the changes in chromatophores are controlled by muscles and pigment sacs. Others are caused by crystal structures in the cells which can reflect different light wavelengths.
 
Watch this video to learn about the complex way chameleons and other animals can change their colour (4:28 minutes)
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=240#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: Chameleons are Masters of Nanotechnology by Reactions on YouTube
 
Learn more from this online resource (link opens in a new tab).

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-022-colour-chemistry-photography-and-chromatography.xhtml =====

Colour chemistry 2: photography and chromatography

 

 

 

 
Figure 2.33. Daguerrotype photographic image by Louis Daguerre, 1837. Image attribution: Louis Daguerre creator QS:P170,Q131405, Daguerreotype Daguerre Atelier 1837, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Photography
 

The section on Optics in this resource explains how cameras work to project an image into the device using lenses and a camera obscura. In digital devices, the image is captured and saved as a digital image file, but originally, in traditional photography, the image was captured and fixed onto a light-sensitive film, which could then be used to reproduce multiple images.
 
Converting the image that appears in the camera to something that is printed on paper requires multiple chemical processes. An introduction to chemical photography is explained here…
 
 
Black and White photography
 
Black & white photography was invented before colour photography. It involves the use of light-sensitive silver halide crystals that form an emulsion on celluloid or plastic film with gelatin (originally, glass plates were used). The energy from the light waves that enter the camera and hit the film causes a chemical reaction with the silver halide. Creating silver halide crystals for photographic film is a complex chemical process making them photosensitive to all visible wavelengths of light.
 
The more light that comes into the camera and hits the light-sensitive film, the greater the reaction in the silver halide crystals, which creates silver ions. The grains of silver halide create an image by reacting to the different amounts of light hitting different parts of the film and creating different quantities of silver ions. However, you can’t see the image on the film until the film is ‘developed’ because it’s still light-sensitive and the image is not yet stable.
 
Developing photographic film is another process where chemicals are used to turn the silver ions into silver metal – more light produces more silver and a darker, opaque area on the film. Less light produces a more transparent area on the film. This process creates what we call a negative image – light parts of the image appear dark and dark parts appear light.  Once the film is developed, the chemical processes must be stopped and fixed so that the silver halide crystals are removed and only the silver metal is left. Once developed, you can take the film out into the light and see the negative image.
 
So how do we create a positive image from the negative film?  Another chemical process is used with light-sensitive paper, which also contains silver halide crystals held on the paper with a gelatinous emulsion – like the photographic film.
 
A white light is shone through the negative film onto the paper, activating the silver halide to create more silver ions on the paper. You can’t see the image on the paper until it is developed in a bath of chemicals that turn the silver ions into silver metal – which oxidises and shows up as dark areas on the paper. The process is then stopped and fixed – just like the film. This is how we get a positive image on a photograph – the clear areas on the negative let more light through and create darker areas on the paper. The dark, opaque areas on the film let less light through and therefore create lighter areas on the photographic paper.
 
Learn more about the history of photography and Daguerre (link opens in a new tab)(Figure 2.33) who was one of the first photographers to create stable photographic images.
 
Colour photography
 
Colour photography is more complex than black and white. It is a subtractive colour process. Colour film uses silver halide just like black and white photography, but the colour film has three layers of emulsion, each with a different light-sensitive dye mixed with silver halide that is sensitised so that each layer only captures either red, green or blue light. To create a colour negative image, the dyes form the complementary or opposite colour:
 
Red-sensitive layers have cyan-coloured dye.
 
Green-sensitive layers have magenta-coloured dye.
 
Blue-sensitive layers have yellow-coloured dye.
 
The film is developed, and the silver halide is removed in this process, leaving only the coloured layers on the film.  Printing to colour photographic paper is a similar process to printing black and white, turning a negative colour image into a positive colour image, but the paper has three layers of emulsion, just like the colour film, sensitive to red, green and blue light, which creates a chemical reaction turning the dyes into cyan, magenta and yellow dyes (Figure 2.34).
 
Note: there are also special colour films that create a positive image instead of a negative one, and these were used in slide projectors – a technology not often seen today since the advent of digital photography and projections.
 

 
Figure 2.34. Early colour photograph of Agen, France by Louis Ducos du Hauron, 1877. Image attribution: Louis Ducos du Hauron (1837 – 1920), Duhauron1877, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Learn more about the history of colour photography (link opens in a new tab).
 
Chromatography
 

 
Chromatography is a chemical process that is used for separating the different parts of a mixture – a liquid or gas substance that has multiple ingredients.  The name means ‘colour writing’ from the Greek words chroma and graphe. This process was originally used to separate different coloured pigments that were all mixed together – a technique also used to create coloured dyes for making textiles and carpets.
 
Chromatography today isn’t specifically about separating colours. It’s used to separate all kinds of substances.
 
The way it works is by dissolving the mixture in some kind of solvent which could be gas or liquid – the mobile phase – and then using another material which could be a liquid or solid – the stationary phase – to separate the parts of the mixture. Because the different substances in the mixture travel along the stationary phase material at different speeds, they get separated from each other and form different bands.
 
If you’re trying to separate colours from a liquid mixture by using paper, for example, you would see different stripes of colour appearing as some colours move faster along the paper and so move closer to the top, and others move more slowly, so remain closer to the bottom – like a rainbow of different coloured stripes. Figure 2.35 shows an example of this using paper and a liquid solution to show the chromatography of chlorophyll.
 
Figure 2.35. Chromatography of chlorophyl. Image attribution: Flo~commonswiki, Chromatography of chlorophyll – Step 7, CC BY-SA 2.5
 
A very simple way to see this process work is to use black ink (the mixture), water (the solvent) and absorbent paper (the stationary phase material) to separate the colours from the ink mixture. See the activity details below – you can try this experiment at home.
 
Learn more about chromatography:
 
Ask a Scientist: What is Chromatography?  (link opens in a new tab)
 
Explain That Stuff: Chromatography (link opens in a new tab)
 

Activity: paper chromatography experiment
 

You can make your own science experiment at home with a few simple materials to see how chromatography works in practice.
 
Watch this video for details and try your own experiments:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=2253#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: Paper Chromatography | Fun Experiments and Clear Explanations, Science Buddies on YouTube

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-023-colour-chemistry-universal-indicator-and-diagnostic-tests.xhtml =====

Colour chemistry 3: universal indicator and diagnostic tests

 

 

 

 
Figure 2.36. Test tubes containing solutions of pH 1–10 colored with an indicator. Image attribution: Alvy16, PH scale 3, CC BY 4.0
 
Universal indicator
 
We can identify the acidity levels (pH value) of many substances with colour testing.
 
What is pH?
 
pH, originally meaning “potential of Hydrogen”, is a numbering system used for measuring the acidity of substances dissolved in a water solution. A low pH value has a higher acid content. A high pH value indicates a higher alkaline or basic substance. Water has a neutral pH value of 7, which is why it’s a good solution to test the pH of other substances dissolved in it. For example, lemon juice can have a pH of around 2 – which is very acidic. Lemons have a high quantity of citric acid in them, which is why they have a low pH value. The detergent you use to wash your dishes is alkaline or basic, so it might have a pH value of around 8.
 
Learn more from this book Acids and Alkalis by Denise Walker (link opens in a new tab).
 
To test the pH level of any solution, a universal indicator is used. This can be in the form of a paper tape that you dip into your solution, or it could be a liquid that is added to a solution. The universal indicator contains a set of chemicals that change colour depending on the amount of acid or base substances in the solution (Figure 2.37). They work by producing extra protons depending on how acidic or alkaline the solution is, which in turn emit photons with different wavelengths.
 

 
Figure 2.37. Chemistry of Universal Indicator by James Kennedy Monash. Image attribution: Chemistry of Universal Indicator by James Kennedy Monash, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0, select image to enlarge.
 
Indicators in Nature
 
Hydrangeas are flowering plants that can grow flowers in a range of colours, including white, pink, purple and blue.  Did you know that Hydrangea flowers can change their colour depending on the acidity of the soil?  You can turn your pink hydrangea flowers blue by adding an acidic chemical like aluminium sulphate to your plant’s water (Figure 2.38). The roots absorb this chemical, and the flower petals act as a natural indicator, turning from pink to blue if the soil pH level is more acidic than alkaline (basic).
 

 
Figure 2.38. Blue hydrangea flowers. Image attribution: photograph by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
You can also use red cabbage as an indicator by making a solution with chopped-up leaves and water. Red cabbage contains a water-soluble pigment called anthocyanin, which turns red if mixed with an acid substance and blue/green if mixed with an alkaline/base substance.
 
There are other plants that have anthocyanin and can also be used in the same way. Can you find three other examples?
 
Learn more about acids and bases (link opens in a new tab).
 
You can buy universal indicator online and do your own experiments with substances around your home to see which are acids and which are bases, or you can make your own indicator with red cabbage. You can start by testing foods, drinks and cleaning products around your home. Is your tap water a pH of 7? If not, it might have other chemicals in it. See the activity below for instructions on making your own red cabbage indicator.
 

Activity: make a red cabbage indicator
 

You can make your own indicator at home with a red cabbage and a few simple materials to test the pH of different substances.
 
Watch this video for details and try your own experiments:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=2255#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: Test asides with home-made pH indicator, BBC Earth Lab on YouTube
 
 
 
 
 
Diagnostic medical tests
 
Have you ever wondered how a pregnancy test or a COVID Rapid Antigen Test (RAT) works? How do the coloured lines appear on the test strip?
 
A pregnancy test uses chemicals that change colour when they come into contact with certain enzymes that attach to antibodies. When you are pregnant, your body produces a hormone called human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). This hormone is excreted by the kidneys into urine – so putting urine on the test strip will start a chemical process that tests for the hCG hormone.  The test strip contains an enzyme that will attach itself to the hCG hormone in the urine. As the urine moves along the test strip, there are two lines that can change colour – one will change colour and become visible if it comes into contact with the enzyme that is attached to the hCG – the test line. Another line will change colour and become visible if the enzymes not attached to hCG come into contact with it – the control line.
 
Two lines are needed to ensure the test has worked correctly because if there was only one line, it could show a false-negative result if the test didn’t work properly.
 
https://www.compoundchem.com/2018/11/09/pregnancy-tests/
 
Figure 2.39. How do pregnancy test work?(Embedded image – click to open in a new tab) Image attribution: Compound Interest – How do pregnancy tests work?
 
Watch this video that explains how a COVID rapid antigen test works:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=2255#oembed-2 
 
 
Media attribution: Chemist Breaks Down How At-Home Covid Tests Work | WIRED by Wired on YouTube

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-024-colour-chemistry-fireworks.xhtml =====

Colour chemistry 4: fireworks

 

 

 

 
Figure 2.40. New Year’s Eve Fireworks on Sydney Harbour. Image attribution: Rob Chandler, New Year’s Eve on Sydney Harbour, CC BY-SA 2.0
 
How do they make different coloured fireworks?
 
Fireworks were recorded as originating from China in the 8th Century CE. It is said that explosive black powder was accidentally invented by alchemists who mixed potassium nitrate (also called saltpetre), sulfur and honey together while trying to create the elixir of life. The mixture exploded when heated – this is called an exothermic chemical reaction. Recipes for this explosive mixture eventually made their way across Asia and the Arabic world to Europe, which is where fireworks as we know them today were first created.
 
The explosive part of fireworks is gunpowder (black powder) which is now made from saltpetre, sulfur and charcoal. The reason fireworks can appear to have a range of colours is because different chemical compounds are used, which are mostly metals that burn very brightly, and these are coated in gunpowder. Exploding gunpowder burns the chemical compounds, which causes electrons in the compounds to get excited and release excess energy as photons (light). These photons have different wavelengths in the visible spectrum depending on the energy of each chemical’s electrons, and this is how we see fireworks as different colours (Figure 2.41).
 
Some colours, like blue fireworks, are harder to make because the chemical compounds are not stable. Purple is also difficult because it’s made from a mixture of red and blue compounds.
 

Fireworks colours and their chemical compounds:
 

Red – Strontium salts

 Strontium Nitrate, Strontium Carbonate and Strontium Sulfate
 
Orange – Calcium salts

 Calcium Carbonate, Calcium Chloride and Calcium Sulfate
 
Yellow – Sodium salts

 Sodium Nitrate, Sodium Oxalate and Cryolite
 
Green – Barium salts

 Barium Nitrate, Barium Carbonate, Barium Chloride and Barium Chlorate
 
Blue – Copper salts

 Copper (I) Chloride, Copper Carbonate and Copper Oxide
 
Purple – Combination of Red and Blue

 Strontium and Copper compounds
 
Silver – white hot metals

 Magnesium and Aluminium
 
White – burning metal

 Magnesium, Aluminium and Titanium
 
 
 
 
 

 
Figure 2.41. Image attribution: this image shared from www.compoundchem.com (link opens in a new tab), Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives licence, © Compound Interest 2015. Select image to enlarge.

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-025-biology-of-the-human-eye.xhtml =====

Anatomy of the human eye

 

 

 

 
Figure 2.43. Anatomy of the human eye. Image attribution: Human eye by blueringmedia on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Anatomy of the human eye
 
The eye works like a Camera Obscura – a small, almost spherical chamber (Figure 2.43) where light enters via the cornea and through a small hole (the pupil). The iris controls how much light enters the eye through the pupil. Light then passes through a lens which can change shape to focus the image. The image is projected through a transparent, gel-like substance (vitreous humour) to the back of the eye (retina and macula), which contains light-sensitive cells. The retina is connected to the brain via the optic nerve.
 
Just like in a camera obscura, the image projected onto the retina is upside-down and reversed, but we learn to interpret the visual input the right way around.
 
What is perhaps the most interesting part of eye biology for colour theorists is how the cells in the retina are sensitive to light and colour and how this information is transmitted to the brain.
 

 
Figure 2.44. Photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye.  Image attribution: Photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye by designua on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Retinal cells
 
Photons of light falling on the light-sensitive cells of the retina are converted into electrical signals that are transmitted to the brain by the optic nerve (Figures 2.44 and 2.45). The brain interprets this information as vision.
 

 
Figure 2.45. Photographic image of rod and cone cells of the retina. Image attribution: Helga Kolb, Rrods and cones of the primate retina, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
There are three types of cells in the retina that convert light energy into electrical energy.
 
Rods

 These cells respond to low-intensity light and help us to see low-resolution, black-and-white images – it’s why we can still see things in very low light. Animals that can see in the dark have more rods than we do.
 
Cones

 These cells respond to high-intensity light and enable us to see high-resolution, coloured images.
 
Photosensitive ganglion cells

 These cells respond to a full range of light intensities and help the eye adjust the amount of light that enters the eye and reaches the retina. Ganglion cells help define what we see – especially when it comes to recognising edges and borders.
 
Ganglion cells have also been discovered to regulate the hormone melatonin, and the circadian rhythm, which both help us have a regular sleep cycle. This is why it’s not good to look at your screen devices late at night because the blue light stimulates these cells and can inhibit natural sleep processes.
 
Cones  – how do they detect colour?
 
There are two current theories about how cone cells detect colour, and they can both help us understand how colour vision works.
 
Trichromatic colour vision theory
 
Trichromatic theory of colour vision tells us that we have three different types of cone cells in our eyes – one each for red, green and blue. These cells are stimulated by different ranges of light waves, and it’s the combination of information from all three types of cells that makes up the millions of colours our brains can perceive. However, it doesn’t fully explain phenomena like how we can’t see “yellowish-blue” or “reddish-green”.
 
Opponent and complementary colour theories
 
The opponent process theory of colour tries to describe how the cone cells are more complicated than just red, green, and blue receptive. Instead, the cones have opposite reactions. Originally the opponent pairs were thought to be red-green, blue-yellow and black-white. But in recent times, complementary colour theory shows us that the three “opponent” pairs are red-cyan, green-magenta, and blue-yellow.
 
These are very complex theories that attempt to explain all the weird things that we see, like afterimage optical illusions. None of the theories described here are able to explain all of our visual experiences, but research continues to explore how our eyes and brain work together to see colour.
 
You can test the afterimage and complementary colour theory now – all you need is a white piece of paper or wall and the image in Figure 2.46.
 

Activity – afterimage optical illusion
 

Stare at the image in Figure 2.46 for 20 seconds (red square with a smaller white interior square). Then quickly look at a piece of white paper or a white wall and stare at the white area for a while.
 

 
Figure 2.46. Red Square with white interior. Image attribution: Red Square with white interior by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
What you might briefly see is a faint afterimage of the opposite colours – a blurry cyan square with a smaller dark square inside it, as in Figure 2.47.
 
This optical illusion can be explained by opponent theory. By staring at the red square for a long time, the cone cells become weaker at detecting red (or transmitting the red vision signal to the brain). Therefore, when you look away to the white paper, the white colour doesn’t register properly as white, it leaves out the red part of white light, and you only see the opposite colour – cyan.
 
After a while, this illusion fades and your vision will return to normal.
 

 
Figure 2.47. Red afterimage: cyan square with grey interior. Image attribution: Red afterimage: cyan square with grey interior by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
 
 

 
Learn more about opponent process (link opens in a new tab).
 
 
 
Chimerical colours – impossible or imaginary colours.
 
The afterimage in the experiment above is also known as a chimerical colour, after the mythical beast, the Chimera. Objects around us do not have imaginary colours, we use that term to describe colours we might see that are not part of normal vision. However, theoretically, there are mathematical descriptions of colours that are outside the visual colour space.
 
The cone cells in our eyes have sensitivities to short, medium and long wavelengths, and these sensitivities overlap a bit. We don’t usually see colour with only one type of cone at a time – it’s usually a mixture. An impossible colour might occur, for example, if we only saw green with the medium-length cone – we might see it as an extremely intense green. Something outside of the range of the CIELAB colour space.
 
Types of Chimerical colours (Figure 2.48)
 
Stygian
 
Stygian colours are both dark and impossibly saturated. You could see “stygian blue” by staring at bright yellow (to cause a dark blue afterimage), then looking at a deep black surface. The blue afterimage is viewed over the black, and simultaneously as dark as the black.
 
Self-luminous 
 
The experiment using Figure 2.46 is an example of self-luminous colour. The cyan afterimage is self-luminous and might appear even brighter than the white paper you are looking at.
 
Hyperbolic
 
This is an impossibly highly saturated colour (hyperbolic means exaggerated). You can try an example of this more intense and highly saturated colour by changing the experiment using Figure 2.46.
 
Try the experiment again, and this time, after you focus on the red square (Figure 2.46), look straight at the blurry cyan square below it (Figure 2.47). You should see an impossibly bright cyan – brighter than any colour you could see with normal light.
 
Eye fatigue template for impossible colours
 
 
 

 
Figure 2.48. Diagram for viewing “impossible” chimerical colours that are only accessible via fatigue effects in the human eye. Image attribution: Lisa Cianci, adapted from an image by Zowie at English Wikipedia, Chimerical-color-demo, CC BY-SA 3.0

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-026-how-the-brain-interprets-colour-information.xhtml =====

How the brain interprets colour information

 

 

 
Binocular vision
 
As stated in the Optics section on 3D glasses, we have two eyes, yet only see one image. The brain processes a lot of visual information that comes from two sources at the same time, and it puts this all together to make one image that allows us to interact with the world around us. There are many complex processes happening very quickly, all at once. It is thought that around 40% of the brain’s function is used for processing vision.
 

 
Figure 2.49. Human Brain, Sagittal Section. Image attribution: Human Brain Sagittal Section with labels by HANK GREBE on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
The optic nerve connects the retina at the back of the eye to a part of the brain called the thalamus (Figure 2.49). The thalamus processes the information from both eyes and sends it to another part of the brain – the visual cortex in the occipital lobe. The visual cortex contains cells that detect different kinds of visual information, like colour, form and movement. It puts all of this information together into what we perceive as an image. This image is then sent to the prefrontal cortex, which processes that information along with other information, like emotions and memories. This all helps us to not only see but to understand what we are seeing and make sense of objects, movement, depth perception, light and colour.
 
 
 
Watch this video for more information
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=246#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: How Your Eyes Make Sense of the World | Decoder, National Geographic, on YouTube
 
Colour is all in our heads! The way we perceive colour is subjective and can depend on how we are seeing the environment, the lighting, and the positioning of colours next to each other. This relates to the content in chapter 1, section 1.3 colour aesthetics, and the creative experiments done by artists and theorists like Johannes Itten and Josef Albers.
 
Is Magenta a real colour?
 
There was a recent online article claiming that magenta isn’t a real colour because it doesn’t exist on the colour spectrum. Of course, you could say that about any colour that isn’t visible on the spectrum as a single wavelength (like brown, for example) because our brains interpret many light wavelengths from the visible spectrum and mix the wavelengths for red and blue to make a colour that we see as magenta.
 
Read this Ars Technica article to understand the whole story (link opens in a new tab).
 
 
 
Optical illusions
 
Optical illusions can tell us a lot about how our brains make sense of the light waves that enter our eyes.  One of the most common illusions relates to relative colour and lightness. A colour can look completely different depending on what’s next to it.
 
The animation in Figure 2.50 is a good example of the concept. The moving square does not change colour at all, but our perception of the colour changes as the background colour blends from pink to green.
 

 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=246 
 
 
Figure 2.50. Relative colour animation: pink to green. Image attribution: Relative colour animation: pink to green by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
It also helps explains recent viral social media phenomena like the striped dress (link opens in a new tab) – is it blue and black or white and gold?
 
Learn more about optical illusions here and watch this video for more information.
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=246#oembed-2 
 
 
Media attribution: Optical Illusions show how we see | Beau Lotto, Ted on YouTube
 
This video discusses how what we see is subjective – can you really trust what you see?
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=246#oembed-3 
 
 
Media attribution: Everything You See is Fake | Fractured Realities, BBC Earth Lab on YouTube

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-027-colour-blindness.xhtml =====

Colour blindness

 

 

 
Colour blindness is usually a genetic condition that you are born with. It is often a hereditary condition, which means that it is passed down from your parents, but there are other ways that people can become colour blind, including through disease or injury.
 
Colour blindness affects colour perception – most people with colour blindness can see clearly and can see some colours, but not all colours of the visible spectrum. Some forms of colour blindness affect more males than females. For example, the gene mutation responsible for red/green colour blindness is carried on the X chromosome. Males only have one X chromosome, and females have two, which means that females are less likely to have colour blindness because even if they have the mutated gene on one X chromosome, they have another one which may not have the mutation.
 
 
 

 
Figure 2.51. Comparisons of vision differences: normal trichromacy, deuteranopia, tritanopia and monochromacy. Image attributions:

 Q-lieb-in, Вечір на “інтегралі” – річка Південний Буг, CC BY-SA 4.0, Tohaomg, Deuteranopia sight, CC BY-SA 4.0, Tohaomg, Tritanopia sight, CC BY-SA 4.0, Tohaomg, Monochromacy sight, CC BY-SA 4.0
 
Types of colour blindness
 
Normal colour vision is called Trichromacy (tri means three, chroma means colour) where all three types of cone cells function properly.
 
Anomalous trichromacy is where normal trichromatic vision doesn’t work properly (Figure 2.51). The cones might still perceive light, but they are not perceiving the right range of light wavelengths. This can also have different levels of severity. Some people with anomalous trichromacy might not have trouble seeing a full range of colours, while others will have noticeable vision differences.
 

Types of anomalous trichromacy
 
protanomaly – reduced sensitivity to red light
 
deuteranomaly – reduced sensitivity to green light
 
tritanomaly – reduced sensitivity to blue light (the rarest form)
 
 
 
 
Dichromacy (di means two) is where only two types of cone cells function properly. This means that there are parts of the visible spectrum that can’t be perceived by the brain.
 

Types of Dichromacy:
 
protanopia – unable to see red light
 
deuteranopia – unable to see green light
 
tritanopia – unable to see blue light (the rarest form)
 
 
 
 
A common type of colour blindness is red/green colour blindness, but it’s more complex than not being able to see red or green. The type and severity may be different for each person. Learn more about red/green and other types of colour blindness here (link opens in a new tab).
 
Monochromacy (achromatopsia)
 
Monochromacy (mono means one) is where no colour can be seen at all – everything appears to be in black and white with shades of grey. This form of colour blindness is rarer than Dichromacy (Figure 2.52).
 

 
Figure 2.52. A comparison of the visible colour spectrum in common types of colour blindness. diagram. Image attribution: SyntaxTerror, Color blindness, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Watch this video for more information about colour blindness:
 
 
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=250#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: What is Colour Blindness? – A Week in Science, Royal Institute of Australia on YouTube
 
How do I know if I am colour blind?
 
Some people may not be aware that they have colour blindness – especially if it’s not severe. Other people may find out early or late in their lives.  If you think you might be colour blind, there are websites with online tests that you can try for red/green colour blindness, but not for blue colour blindness.
 
You can see your doctor if you think you may have colour blindness or vision difference. Professional testing is recommended for certain professions like pilots, astronauts, truck drivers, and designers or creative people working with colour. One of the disadvantages of colour blindness, apart from not seeing a full spectrum of colours, is understanding common communication devices, like traffic lights, which are red, amber and green.
 

Activities – test yourself
 

The Ishihara 38 plate CVD test (link opens in a new tab) is a popular test you can try now for red/green colour blindness (Figure 2.53). It uses circles with coloured dots that display numbers or lines. If you have a red/green colour vision problem, you may find it difficult to see the numbers and lines in many of these circles.
 
Ishihara Plate 9 – Can you see a number in this image?
 

 
Figure 2.53. Ishihara Plate 9. Image attribution: Original: Shinobu Ishihara creator QS:P170,Q530761 Derivative work: Pbrks, Ishihara 9, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
The Fansworth-Munsell hue test (link opens in a new tab) is for the arrangement of colours – whether you can see the slight differences in a gradient between two colours can tell you if you have a colour deficiency.
 
These resources contain information and self-test activities to learn more about colour blindness. (links open in new tabs)
 
ColourblindAwareness.org
 
Xrite.com: color perception part 1
 
Xrite.com: hue test
 
ColorVisionTesting.com
 
Color-blindness.com: Ishihara cvd test

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-028-vision-difference.xhtml =====

Vision difference: tetrachromacy and synesthesia

 

 

 
Not everyone sees the same colours or perceives the world around us in the same way. Here are two examples of vision difference:
 
Tetrachromacy
 
Tetrachromacy (tetra means four and chroma means colour) is the name for having four types of cone cells in the eye to perceive colour. It is common in the animal world, but not normal in humans. However, some female humans are tetrachromats and can see a wider range of colours than normal trichromats.
 
Research is ongoing to determine how this works. One theory suggests that it’s related to colour blindness, and the reason it only affects females is because they have two X chromosomes. If a person has one X chromosome with the mutant gene for colour blindness, and the second X chromosome is normal, then this might cause tetrachromacy. This theory speculates that if a person has two different kinds of red/green cone cells that detect different wavelengths of light, they will have the ability to see more colours.  Some tetrachromats may also be able to see better in low light conditions.
 
Watch this video to learn about an artist with tetrachromacy:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=252#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: Seeing colours nobody else can – Incredible Medicine: Dr Weston’s Casebook | Episode 2 – BBC 2, BBC on YouTube
 
You can also read the BBC article here (link opens in a new tab).
 
Synesthesia and colour sensory perception
 
Synesthesia is a neurological condition where you experience one sense through another. An example of synesthesia is hearing music and seeing coloured shapes or for some synesthetes, associating certain numbers or words with particular colours. It’s not only colour-related, though. For some people, hearing certain sounds causes tingling sensations in different parts of their bodies. There are many different kinds of synesthesia.
 
Synesthesia is a type of neurodiversity, and appears at a higher rate in people with other types of neurodiversity such as Autism Spectrum Disorder, or people who identify as transgender or gender variant. Quite a few visual artists and musicians have synesthesia – it’s possible this cross-wiring of the senses can be a benefit to creative practitioners. Some people with synesthesia have incredible memories too, which could be due to how the brain associates sensory input and how it is stored in memory.
 
Two of the more common forms of synesthesia are:
 
Chromesthesia – Sound to colour
 
Grapheme-colour synesthesia – letters and numbers to colour (link opens in a new tab)
 
Watch this video for more information:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=252#oembed-2 
 
 
Media attribution: What color is Tuesday? Exploring synesthesia – Richard E. Cytowic, Ted Ed on YouTube
 
Synesthesia and creativity
 
Visual artists from history who were known to have Chromesthesia (sound to colour) include: Wassily Kandinsky (Figure 2.54), Vincent Van Gogh, David Hockney, and Arcimboldo (he had vision and taste Synesthesia also).
 

 
Figure 2.54. Entwurf 2 zu Komposition VII by Wassily Kandinsky.  Image attribution: Wassily Kandinsky artist QS:P170,Q61064, Entwurf 2 zu Komposition VII (Wassily Kandinsky) DSC1682, CC0 1.0
 
Learn more from these links:
 
Listening to Art by Alanna Irwin (link opens in a new tab)
 
How synaesthesia inspires artists (link opens in a new tab)
 
Contemporary artists with synesthesia
 
Melissa McCracken (link opens in a new tab)
 
Carol Steen (link opens in a new tab)
 
Sobrane Symcock  (link opens in a new tab)
 
There are many popular musicians who also have chromesthesia – can you search the Internet and find some that you know about?
 
This synesthesia FAQ (frequently asked questions ) web page (link opens in a new tab) has some useful information if you want to learn more.
 
Note: A study that indicated more females have synesthesia than males may not be accurate due to the bias that more females would be likely to self-refer for the study.[1]
 

Simner, Julia & Carmichael, Duncan. (2015). Is synaesthesia a dominantly female trait?. Cognitive neuroscience. 6. 10.1080/17588928.2015.1019441. (link opens in a new tab) ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-029-accessible-colour.xhtml =====

Accessible colour

 

 

 
Using accessible colour is important in the media and objects we interact with in everyday life. This enables the greatest number of people to see and understand what is communicated. As explained in the previous sections about vision difference, not everyone can see the same range of colour or light, and some people have other vision problems that make it difficult to see. This is particularly relevant for reading text and for viewing visual communications content like maps, diagrams, charts and infographics that present information in very visual and colourful ways.
 
If you are a designer working with print or digital media, knowing about accessibility and how to make sure your content is accessible is very useful for creating content that can engage with a wide audience, and promote values like equality and fairness in branding for products and services.
 

 
Figure 2.55. Image showing the difference between equality and equity. Image attribution: Equality and Equity Concept Illustration. by juliabatsheva on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Universal, Inclusive and Equity focused design – what are they?
 
Universal, inclusive and equity-focused design are concepts and principles that can assist you as a designer. They can ensure you consider all user needs when creating all kinds of products, buildings, online content, and anything that goes through a design process.
 
Universal design principles are about making sure your design is accessible to everyone.
 
Inclusive design principles include focusing on user groups that might have special needs or who might be otherwise excluded.
 
Equity-focused design principles are proactive in working with user groups who are minorities or have special needs to create solutions and form ongoing relationships with those communities.
 
You can use one or more of these as part of your design methodology. Read this article for more information: Universal, Inclusive and Equity-Focused Design: Why They are Critical for Your Website (link opens in a new tab).
 
What does this mean for accessible colour in art and design? 
 
Planning your colour schemes and relationships for creative work should involve careful consideration of accessibility issues that might impact your audience. Examples of accessible colour for both print and digital media include:
 
using appropriate contrast (light and dark) in text and background colour
 
using colour combinations (hue, saturation and lightness) in text and graphics that people with colour blindness can see
 
having enough space around colour elements so they are not confusing to understand
 
having text at the appropriate size and weight, or allowing resizable text
 
including warnings for moving or flashing colours and images that can trigger seizures in some people.
 

 
Figure 2.56. Some examples of good and bad colour combinations for accessibility. Image attribution: image by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0. Select image to enlarge.
 
This Mozilla article gives a good overview of understanding colour accessibility for the Web (link opens in a new tab).
 
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) has a Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) (link opens in a new tab), which develops standards and support materials to help you understand and implement accessibility in your online content.
 

Activities: using tools and resources for accessible art and design
 

Activity 1.

 Try testing the colours of your own website or print graphics to see if they have good accessibility. If not, how can you tweak your colour palette to have more accessible text and graphics?
 
There are many free online tools that you can use in your art and design work to check that the colour combinations you are using are accessible and comply with W3C standards. Most of these are checking foreground and background colour contrast for text and graphics. Here are three examples:  (links open in new tabs)
 
Accessible web contrast checker
 
Web AIM contrast checker
 
Colour contrast checker
 
 
 
Activity 2.

 If you’re planning an exhibition or creative event, whether online or in a physical space, make a checklist based on information in the resources listed here. You can work through each item in your checklist to ensure your event has the best accessibility you are able to provide. That might include things like the colour of signs and labels, easy-to-read instructions with adequate fonts, lighting, arrangement of artworks, etc.
 
These links and resources for artists and designers can help make your creative work more accessible:  (links open in new tabs)
 
Access Arts resources
 
Accessible Arts -accessible exhibition design
 
Tangled art & disability – resources
 
Arts Access Victoria
 
Creative User Projects (Canada)
 
Centre for Inclusive Design
 
The A11y Project – resources
 
W3C standards – accessibility

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-030-how-animals-see-colour.xhtml =====

How animals see colour

 

 

 

 
Figure 2.57. Owl eyes – front view. Image attribution: owl eyes… by Ammit on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
We humans are mammals and primates. The way we see colour is similar to many other animals. However, there is a wide range of colour vision in the animal kingdom, and many different kinds of eyes or “vision systems”. This is due to animals’ biological makeup, environment, and evolutionary history.
 
This page gives a short introduction to some of the weird and wonderful ways living creatures have evolved over millions of years to detect light and colour, and why it is useful to have colour vision. Studying colour vision in the animal world helps us understand visual systems and could lead to new discoveries in fields such as optics, chemistry and biology.
 

Topics covered on this page
 

Primates and other mammals
 
 
 

Birds, reptiles and sea creatures
 
 
 

Insects, arachnids and other creepy crawlies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As explained in other parts of this resource, colour is not a fixed attribute of an object. Colour is a property of the “visual system” of the animal that sees it. The same light wavelengths reflected or emitted from an object can be seen differently depending on the anatomy of an animal’s vision.[1]
 
 
 
Primates and other mammals
 

 
Figure 2.58. Monkey eye. Image attribution: Monkey’s eyes look at you by Thanaphat on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Primates mostly have good trichromatic colour vision, and humans may have the best colour vision of all primates. Most mammals have a mixture of rod and cone cells in the retina of the eye – just like humans – but the amounts of each type of light-detecting (photoreceptive) cells may differ between species. It is thought that being able to see colour is an advantage when searching for food. Being able to tell the difference between ripe (red and orange) and unripe (green) fruit on trees and plants, for example, makes it much easier to find things to eat.
 
Many mammals like cats, dogs, rabbits, cattle, sheep, and goats can only see a small amount of colour. These animals are mostly dichromats (they can only see two colours) and may only see pastel shades of blue and yellow. This means they have protanopia (red–green colour blindness).
 
Some mammals (like cats and wolves) have evolved so that their eyes contain more rods than cones, allowing them to see and hunt in the dark. It’s not much use having good colour vision in the dark (as explained in Why are things different colours? in this resource), but having lots of rods that can perceive subtle differences between light and dark is much better for detecting the movement of prey in dark environments.
 
Some sea mammals, like dolphins, can detect blue light very well – which is useful when underwater, but cannot differentiate between colours at all. Dolphin eye lenses can change shape to be able to see well both above and below water – they can do something called “spy-hopping”, where they raise their heads above water vertically to see their surroundings [2].
 
 
 
Birds, reptiles and sea creatures
 

 
Figure 2.59. Gecko eye. Image attribution: Colorful Toke’s gecko amazing eye macro by Passakorn on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Birds of prey, such as eagles and hawks, have excellent colour vision, with four types of cone cells (tetrachromacy), allowing them to see the visible spectrum plus ultraviolet light, which we humans cannot see. This ability helps these birds to locate prey from great distances. For other birds, tetrachromatic colour vision makes it easier to locate specific flowers, nectar and fruits, and is important in mating behaviours. Pigeons have five types of cone cells (pentachromacy), but owls, as nocturnal predators, have very little colour vision. Early research suggested that owls were completely colour blind, relying only on highly sensitive rod cells to detect light and dark. However, more recent studies have found that owls do have some colour vision. They have the ability to see certain hues in the blue-green range of the visible spectrum[3].
 
The gecko is a type of lizard that has a complex colour vision system, which has been the subject of many research studies. One of the most impressive features of gecko eyes is their excellent colour vision at night. Unlike many other lizards, which have only two types of cone cells (dichromacy), some gecko species have four types of cones (tetrachromacy), allowing them to perceive a wider range of colours.
 
Another interesting feature of gecko vision is the presence of oil droplets within the cone cells. These droplets act as filters, absorbing certain wavelengths of light and enabling a greater sensitivity to other wavelengths[4]. The exact function of these oil droplets in gecko colour vision is still not fully understood, but they are thought to play a role in improving the ability to tell the difference between colours, even in low-light environments.
 
Chameleons are well known for their ability to change colour, but they also have very good colour vision – possibly the best vision of all lizards. Chameleons have “double cones” and four types of single cone cells, but very few rod cells, which means they don’t see well in the dark. The cone cells also contain oil droplets like geckos. Chameleons can see a wider range of colours than humans can, including ultraviolet light, and their eyes can move and focus together or independently of each other (monocular and binocular vision). They can focus on objects at great distances because of the shape of their corneas and lenses. Chameleons (and certain other animals) also have a layer in their eyes called the tapetum lucidum, which reflects light and enhances their vision in low-light conditions.
 
Snakes do not have colour vision in the usual sense. They are able to distinguish between light and dark, but they cannot perceive different colours. However, some species of snakes have specialised receptors in pit organs on their faces that allow them to ‘see’ (or sense) infrared light, which helps them locate warm-blooded prey. This is not the same as photoreceptors in the eyes. However, it is a means of detecting wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation.
 
Octopuses and squids (cephalopod species) have good colour vision. Their eyes are more similar to those of humans than those of most other invertebrates, with a single lens and a retina that contains both rod and cone photoreceptor cells. However, the way these photoreceptor cells function in cephalopods is quite different from that of humans and other vertebrates. The cones in octopuses and squids are able to detect a wide range of colours, including ultraviolet light, and they are believed to be able to see a greater range of colours than humans can. They also have a unique type of photoreceptor cell called a rhabdom that helps to detect polarised light, which is important for things like communication, navigation, and camouflage.
 
In fish, the number and distribution of cone cells for colour vision vary depending on the species and the environment in which they live. For example, fish that live in shallow water with a lot of sunlight tend to have more cone cells than those that live in deeper water with less light. Some fish also have rhabdom cells that allow them to see polarised light, which they use for navigation and communication.
 
Crustaceans have a more complex visual system than fish, with a wider range of visual pigments and photoreceptor cells. Some crustaceans, like the mantis shrimp, also have a type of compound eye (like insects) called an apposition eye, which allows them to have high spatial resolution and sensitivity to small changes in light intensity. Mantis shrimp also have 12 types of cones – although these cones only show very narrow bands of light wavelengths, so they don’t see more colours than we do. Like fish and cephalopods, crustaceans also have rhabdom cells that allow them to see polarised light, and are also used for navigation and communication.
 
Insects, arachnids and other creepy crawlies
 

 
Figure 2.60. Horsefly eyes. Image attribution: horsefly insect macro green eye big color by murgvi on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Insects and arachnids have evolved to have different types of colour vision. Insects, for example, have trichromatic colour vision, which allows them to see three primary colours: ultraviolet, blue, and green. In contrast, arachnids, such as spiders and scorpions, generally have dichromatic colour vision, which allows them to see two primary colours: blue and green – although there are exceptions to this.
 
Insects usually have compound eyes, which are made up of many tiny lenses called ommatidia. Some insects can have over 20,000 ommatidia in each compound eye, which can give them an almost 360-degree range of vision. Each ommatidium contains a single photoreceptor, and the brain processes the signals from many ommatidia to create an image. Most insects can see ultraviolet light, which is used to detect nectar and pollen and is also used in mating behaviours. For example, bumblebees are trichromats, like humans, but the light wavelengths their photoreceptors detect are in a different range to ours – closer to ultraviolet light.
 
Most spiders have eight eyes, and each eye has a single photoreceptor. Some spiders can only detect light, but cannot see in colour. However, some species of jumping spiders have excellent colour vision, with four types of photoreceptors (tetrachromacy).
 
It is thought that some species of butterflies have the most photosensitive receptors of all insects.
 
The bluebottle butterfly has 15 types of photoreceptor! With one type of cone stimulated by ultraviolet, another by violet, three by varying shades of blue, one blue-green, four by green and five by red light, the common bluebottle butterfly has five times as many colour photoreceptors as we do.[…] Researchers believe the butterflies only use four of their photoreceptors for day-to-day colour vision, while the others[sic] 11 are used in specific environments, such as picking out objects hidden in vegetation.[5]
 
 
 
The exact anatomy and systems of colour vision in many different kinds of animals are still being studied. There is much that is not yet fully understood. We can study the anatomy of different eyes and how they detect light and colour, but we don’t exactly know how each animal’s brain interprets the information from photoreceptor cells like rods and cones.
 
The research to date has provided valuable insights into the evolution and function of colour vision in these animals. You can find out more about how different animals see colour by starting your own research online. You can visit the links on this page or search online or at the library to find books, journal articles and videos on this topic.
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=1952#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: Watch: How Animals and People See the World Differently, National Geographic, on YouTube
 
Further reading on colour vision in animals  (links opens in new tabs)
 
Color Matters – How animals see color
 
Wikipedia – Evolution of color vision
 
Ask A Biologist – Colors animals see
 
Cosmos Magazine – The incredible and bizarre spectrum of animal colour vision
 
Queensland Brain Institute – Colour vision in animals: a comprehensive overview
 
Natural History Museum UK, How do other animals see the world? 
 
Natural History Museum UK, Amazing eyes: 17 vision champions
 
Gerl, E.J. and Morris, M.R. The Causes and Consequences of Color Vision. Evo Edu Outreach 1, 476–486 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12052-008-0088-x
 
Kelber A. and Osorio D. 2010, From spectral information to animal colour vision: experiments and concepts, Proceedings of the Royal Society B., Biological Sciences, 277: pp.1617–1625 DOI:http://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2009.2118
 

Gerl, E.J. and Morris, M.R. The Causes and Consequences of Color Vision. Evo Edu Outreach 1, 476–486 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12052-008-0088-x ↵

Scoggins, J. 2016, "Colour and Vision in Dolphins", Sea Watch Foundation, <https://www.seawatchfoundation.org.uk/colour-and-vision-in-dolphins/>, accessed 12/01/2023 ↵

Wagner, H. J., Ripperger, S. P., & Hart, N. S. (2016). Cone topography and spectral sensitivity in two potentially dichromatic owl species. Journal of Vision, 16(8), 1-16. ↵

Lin, W., Cheng, C. Y., Huang, Y. T., Lin, C. H., & Wu, C. H. (2020). Retinal movement fine-tunes the oil droplets’ position to adjust the color sensitivity of gecko photoreceptors. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 287(1927), 20201272. ↵

Smith, B. 2016 "The spectrum of animal colour vision", Cosmos Magazine, <https://cosmosmagazine.com/science/biology/the-incredible-and-bizarre-spectrum-of-animal-colour-vision/> viewed 12/01/2023 ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-031-additive-and-subtractive-colour-systems.xhtml =====

Additive and subtractive colour systems

 

 

 
Additive Colour
 
Additive colour works by mixing colours of light. The more colours of light you add together, the closer you get to white light. It is the opposite of the colour spectrum, where white light is refracted (broken up) into a rainbow of colours.
 
Additive primary colours are Red, Green and Blue (RGB). These are the colours from which all other colours of light are made. You can see evidence of this on your computers, televisions and mobile phones. Pixels emit light in different colours based on how much of each primary colour is emitted from each pixel (RGB values).
 
More about additive colour can be found in this resource: 3.2 Colour systems: digital.
 

 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=263 
 
 
Figure 3.3. Interactive Additive Colour Mixer. Image attribution: Interactive Additive Colour Mixer by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
Subtractive Colour
 
Subtractive colour involves mixing physical materials like paint pigments, printing inks, and dyes. The more colour materials you mix, the darker the colour gets. It’s called ‘subtractive’ because of the absorption or subtraction of certain wavelengths from white light. This absorption is based on how different atoms behave when light hits them. See Chapter 2. Colour theory: the visible spectrum in this resource for more information about the physics and chemistry of colour.
 

 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=263 
 
 
Figure 3.4. Interactive Subtractive Colour Mixer. Image attribution: Interactive Additive Colour Mixer by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
Subtractive primary colours are Cyan, Magenta and Yellow (CMY). The traditional primaries Red, Yellow and Blue (RYB) are also useful to know about in some contexts, like understanding the historical development of colour theory and using older colour wheels. Psychological primaries Red, Yellow, Green and Blue are colours that were once also defined as primary because of historical colour theories about how our eyes perceive colour.  See Biology of the human eye for more information about human colour vision and subtractive colour.
 
 
 

A simple example to explain how subtractive colour works
 

Observe something yellow, like a bowl of lemons with white light shining on it (Figure 3.5). The lemons are reflecting light wavelengths that we perceive as yellow and absorbing all other light wavelengths. We see a yellow colour because its opposite colour – blue (and other similar light wavelengths) is subtracted from the white light. Red and green light when mixed create yellow, so certain amounts of red and green light wavelengths (and other wavelengths between red and green) bounce off the lemons and our eyes see those light wavelengths as yellow.
 

 
Figure 3.5. How subtractive colour works. Image attribution: Lemons diagram by Lisa Cianci, adapted from Adobe Stock images, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence). Images 86024180 by Studio KIVI, 287461840 by Yuri Hoyda and 146119533 by Lysenko.A
 
 

 
 
 
Note: for printing, we use the CMYK colour system. In this system, K represents blacK. Black is used as an extra colour when printing because conventional CMY printer inks don’t blend well enough to create a good black colour. Also, black ink tends to be much cheaper than coloured inks.
 
More detailed information about subtractive colour can be found in 3.3 Colour systems: printing and 3.4 Colour systems: paint pigments and dyes.

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-032-additive-and-subtractive-colours-on-the-colour-wheel.xhtml =====

Additive and subtractive colours on the colour wheel

 

 

 
You might observe from the diagram on the previous page that mixing two additive primary colours gives you a subtractive primary colour. You might also observe that mixing two subtractive primary colours gives you an additive primary colour. This can be confusing until you understand how additive and subtractive colour works.
 

The confusion is at once resolved when it is realized that red, green, and blue are selected as additive primaries because they provide the greatest colour gamut in mixtures. For the same reason, the subtractive primaries are, respectively, red-absorbing (cyan), green-absorbing (magenta), and blue-absorbing (yellow).[1]
 
 

 
Our current scientific knowledge and practical understanding of additive and subtractive colours have led to a more accurate colour wheel that displays both additive and subtractive colours, as shown in Figure 3.6.
 
Chapter 1. Colour theory: history and culture describes varied theories of primary, secondary and tertiary colours throughout history. This includes some very different examples of colour wheels, including the RYB (Red, Yellow, Blue) colour wheel (Figure 3.7), which is still used in some contexts to teach colour mixing in visual arts.
 

Here is an image example of a contemporary colour wheel that shows additive primary, secondary and tertiary colours:
 

 
Figure 3.6. RGB colour wheel.  Image attribution: RGB colour wheel with primary secondary tertiary colours by krissada 0n Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
 
 
 
 

 

And here’s an image of a traditional RYB colour wheel
 

 
Figure 3.7. Red, blue, yellow colour wheel. Image attribution: adapted from Colour Wheel – Red Blue Yellow colour by Nattaya on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To see an interactive colour wheel with colour relationship options, visit 3.5 Interactive colour wheels and relationships in this resource.
 
 
 

Encyclopedia Britannica online (Britannica.com), 'The Visible Spectrum' https://www.britannica.com/science/color/The-visible-spectrum  (link opens in a new tab)  ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-033-how-additive-and-subtractive-colour-works-when-printing-a-digital-image.xhtml =====

How additive and subtractive colour works when printing a digital image

 

 

 

 
Figure 3.8. RGB to CMYK conversion flow diagram. Image attribution: RGB to CMYK conversion By Maxim_Kazmin on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
When you create a digital image and then print it on paper, this involves a process of converting the additive colour system (RGB colour) in your digital image to a subtractive system (CMYK colour inks) that prints the correct colours onto paper.
 
Your image editing software or printer software is going through this conversion process, attempting to match what we can see on the digital screen with what will come out of the printer. It’s a complex process, and there are many different automated and manual methods for colour conversion.
 
More detailed information about subtractive colour and the print process can be found in 3.3 Colour systems: printing. View this page for more about converting images from RGB to CMYK.

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-034-practical-activities-mixing-additive-and-subtractive-colours.xhtml =====

Practical activities: mixing additive and subtractive colours

 

 

 
These practical activities can help you to understand how additive and subtractive colour works, and when we use each one to mix colours.
 

Additive colour activity
 

You can do some experiments at home with torches and red, green and blue coloured cellophane or transparent coloured plastic or glass to test how additive colour works (you can also do this experiment with red, green and blue LED lights).
 

If you have red, green and blue cellophane, you can cover three torches – each with different coloured cellophane.
 
In a darkened room, shine the coloured light from the three torches on a white piece of paper or a white wall so the coloured light overlaps.
 
What do you see? How many colour combinations can you make?
 

 
Figure 3.9. Additive colour – three torches. Image attribution: Three torch diagram by Lisa Cianci adapted from Flashlight vector with light by FARBAI on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Educational licence)
 

 
 
An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:

 https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=272#h5p-6 
 
 
 
 
 

What happens if you layer two colours of cellophane together – red and green on the one torch, for example?
 
Does any light shine through the two layers onto the paper? How can you explain this with what you know about additive and subtractive colour? (Hint: the light waves are filtered through one layer of cellophane first, then the other.)
 

 
Figure 3.10. Additive colour – two filters on one torch. Image attribution: Two filter diagram by Lisa Cianci adapted from Flashlight vector with light by FARBAI on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Educational licence)
 

 
 
An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:

 https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=272#h5p-7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Subtractive colour activity
 

Mix paints, inks or felt-tipped pens of different colours to see how many different colours you can make on white paper. It’s easy to make darker colours with these materials, but how hard is it to make a lighter colour without using white paint or adding water to thin the colour out?
 
Most cheap sets of felt-tipped pens have cyan, magenta and yellow colours, as well as red, green, blue, black, brown and possibly even grey. What colours can’t be mixed from other colours? There’s more information on mixing subtractive colours in 3.4 Colour systems: pigments and dyes in this resource.
 

 
Figure 3.11 Hand holding coloured felt-tipped pens. Image attribution: Child hand holding many colourful felt-tip pens by Alexander on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Educational licence)
 
 
 
 
 

 Additive to Subtractive colour activity
 

If you have a digital editing or drawing software app on a computer, tablet or mobile phone, try and find the colour wheel, colour picker or colour sliders to select different colours to draw or paint with.
 
See if your app has information about RGB colour, CMYK colour, or other colour systems like Hexadecimal (covered in the next part of this resource – 3.2 Colour systems: digital). If you can print an image from your digital device, compare the colours on the screen to your printed image – how similar are they?
 
Often the RGB-Red to CMYK-Magenta/Yellow-mix colour conversion is the hardest to get right when printing digital images, although greens and blues can be tricky too, depending on the quality of your printer and printing inks.
 

 
Figure 3.12. Colour slider example. Image attribution: Colour slider image from GIMP image manipulation software application, GNU public licence v.3

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-035-quiz-is-it-additive-colour-or-subtractive-colour.xhtml =====

Test yourself: is it additive colour or subtractive colour?

 

 

 
A multiple choice quiz to test your understanding of colour systems
 
(5 minutes or less)
 
View each type of colour application and choose if it’s using additive or subtractive colour systems, or both…
 
 
An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:

 https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=274#h5p-5 
 
 
How did you go?
 
If you need to learn more about this topic, you can read this section again: 3.1 Additive and Subtractive Colour
 
 
 
Attribution for images used in this quiz all on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence): 
 
Figure 3.13. Title: Abstract color background spectrum lines by kurkalukas

 Figure 3.14. Question 1: Watercolour circles by Liliia

 Figure 3.15. Question 2: Colourful stage lighting by kittiyaporn1027

 Figure 3.16. Question 3: Graphic designer, logo design by REDPIXEL

 Figure 3.17. Question 4: bitcoin logo t shirt design by specialist t shirt

 Figure 3.18. Question 5: Purple wavy hair on white background by MAKOVSKY ART

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-036-colour-spaces-or-gamuts.xhtml =====

Colour gamuts and colour spaces

 

 

 
The previous section of this resource explained the Additive RGB colour system, which is the system used for colour in digital media. However, there are multiple colour spaces related to RGB that are used to describe and create the millions of colours that our digital screens can display – and that we can see with human eyes. It’s useful to know about this if you are working with digital tools and software applications to create digital media.
 
Colour Gamut
 
Colour gamut (also known as colour space) is the complete range or subset of colour that can be produced or recorded by an application, system or device.
 
A common representation of the colour gamut used in digital and print systems is shown in Figure 3.20, which displays the gamut of visible colours and the extent of different colour spaces within that.
 
You can see that the RGB colour space and the CMYK colour space are smaller than the LAB colour space – which is what the human eye can see (for more about CIELAB colour space, visit Contemporary Colour Systems (c. 1930 – 2020+) in this resource).
 

 
Figure 3.20. Image attribution: Difference between cmyk and rgb color space in a lab or CIELAB color space by petrroudny on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Learn more about colour gamut and colour space  (links open in new tabs):
 
Wikipedia: Gamut
 
Wikipedia: CIELAB_color_space
 
RGB colour spaces
 
There are multiple RGB colour spaces, and they each have different colour gamuts. Some have more greens or more reds and yellows. Some are better for digital-to-print conversion. Here is a summary of some popular ones you will probably find on your digital devices:
 

sRGB is a standard RGB colour space (or colour gamut) that HP and Microsoft created cooperatively in 1996 to use on computer displays, printers, and the Internet. It was standardised by the International Electrotechnical Commission as IEC 61966-2-1:1999.
 
It is a preferred standard for web-based media, and many websites and video games have been made using this colour space.
 
 
 
 

opRGB or Adobe RGB was developed in 1998. It was designed to represent most of the colours achievable on CMYK printers, but by using RGB primary colours on a computer display or digital device.
 
The Adobe RGB colour space encompasses approximately 50% of the visible colours specified by the CIELAB colour space, which improves on the sRGB colour gamut, mainly in cyan-green hues. It was standardised by the IEC as IEC 61966-2-5:1999 with the name opRGB (optional RGB colour space) and is used in HDMI (High Definition Multimedia Interface) – a standard for simultaneously transmitting digital video and audio from a source, such as a computer or TV cable box, to a computer monitor, TV or projector.
 
 
 
 

DCI p3  (Digital Cinema Initiatives – Protocol 3) is a more recent standard used by the film industry – mainly for films shown in cinemas. It covers around 45% of the visible colours of the CIELAB colour space and has a wider range of colours than sRGB – around 25% more colours. This increase in visible colour allows for more vibrant colours and can also be used by screens that can display 30-bit colour, such as HDR TV screens. It favours an increase in red-yellow colours as opposed to Adobe RBG, which favours blue-green colours.
 
Viewsonic: using DCI p3 color gamut for video editing  (link opens in a new tab)
 
 
 
 
In a practical application, these different colour spaces can affect how we see images, movies, video games etc., on different devices and why sometimes graphics can look better or worse on different screens. See the next page for details about how digital screens work.

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-037-how-digital-screens-display-colour.xhtml =====

How digital screens display colour

 

 

 
Pixels on our digital screens emit light in different colours based on how much of each primary colour is emitted from each pixel (RGB values). The number of colours we can see created from a digital RGB system depends on the ‘colour depth’ of our screens (also called monitors or displays).
 
The first colour computer screens had an ‘8-bit’ depth which only displayed 256 colours (you might remember old 8-bit video games with very basic colour graphics). Now we have true colour on most computers, which is 8-bit for each RGB colour – or ‘24-bit’ depth. This can display over 16.7 million colours.
 
Some recent high-quality computer displays have ‘30-bit’ depth, which can display 1.07 billion different colour combinations. There is debate about the need for so many colours and whether our eyes can see the difference, although it is claimed that having over one billion colours is useful in certain situations when working with very bright, very dark or very light colours, where a finer level of definition is needed.
 
Viewsonic: color-management and color blindness – how can monitor technologies help?  (link opens in a new tab)
 
Colour calibration
 
Calibration is the process of aligning your digital screen’s colour output to the RGB standard – so what you are seeing on your screen is a true representation of the RGB colours created by your computer. This process is important for working with digital content like photography and digital-to-print processes where it’s necessary to have colour accuracy. Most computer systems will have their own calibration tools, or you can find online applications to help you calibrate your screen.
 
 
 

Activity – test and calibrate the colours on your digital devices
 

Select image to enlarge.
 

 
Figure 3.21. Test Pattern. Image attribution:  Test pattern for PAL video format by chathuporn on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Save a link to this page and open it on all of your digital devices. View the test pattern image in Figure 3.21 and see how it looks on your computer, tablet, mobile device and TV screen. Are the colours different on each device?  Is the brightness different?  Can you adjust your settings to get the best colour and brightness on each device?
 
 
 
 
 
Learn more about digital screen calibration from these links  (links open in new tabs):
 
Viewsonic: Color management – a checklist for digital artists
 
Viewsonic: Best monitor calibration tool – hardware vs software – calibration
 
Viewsonic: What is fogra and why does it matter?
 
Television settings
 
Your home television has picture settings that change the colour, brightness and contrast according to perceived usage. The ‘standard’ picture mode might be OK for sports and reality TV but may not be the best for watching movies or drama series as they were intended by directors because it alters the colour settings. You may be able to change your TV settings to ‘cinema’ or ‘movie’ picture mode when watching movies or streaming TV series to get the best colour. See Colour grading in the Colour aesthetics section of this resource for more about the importance of colour in film and video.
 
Learn more about TV colour setting and ”The Soap Opera Effect”, TV picture settings for colour and motion smoothing.  (link opens in a new tab)

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-038-what-is-hexadecimal-colour.xhtml =====

What is Hexadecimal colour?

 

 

 

What is Hexadecimal colour?
 
The Hexadecimal, or HEX colour system, was developed for creating colours in HTML (HyperText Markup Language) for websites. It’s another way of describing RGB colour values – with a single number.
 
Hexadecimal is a base-16 number system (hex means 6, and decimal means 10), which allows us to represent larger numbers with fewer digits.
 
It uses the numbers 0 to 9 and the letters A to F to describe RGB value colours:
 
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  A  B  C  D  E  F

 .

 .
 
 
 

This is an example of a HEX colour

 (the hash symbol ‘#’ denotes a HEX colour in HTML code):
 

#E86F1F
 
E8 is the Red value
 
6F is the Green value
 
1F is the Blue value
 
Here’s a swatch of the colour:
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
Note that the highest value is Red (E8 is a high number), the second highest is Green, and the last is Blue – which produces this particular shade of orange.
 
The same colour in RGB would have the following values:
 
#E86F1F =  RGB(232, 111, 31)
 
The HEX value is a more efficient way of representing RGB colour information.
 

This colour picker tool (Figure 3.22) shows RGB and HSV values, and the Hexadecimal colour value (HTML notation).
 

 
Figure 3.22. Colour Picker showing various RGB colour values. Image attribution: Colour picker image from GIMP image manipulation software application, GNU public licence v.3
 
 
 
 
 
White in HEX colour is #FFFFFF – the highest number – and black is #000000 – the lowest number.
 
If you convert #FFFFFF from a hexadecimal to a decimal number, you get the number 16,777,215 – which is the exact number of colours that can be displayed on 24-bit computer displays.
 
If you want to test your HEX colour identification skills, you can try this online guessing game – WHAT THE HEX? (link opens in a new tab) – It’s fun and can be addictive!

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-039-other-rgb-colour-models.xhtml =====

Other RGB colour models

 

 

 
Within RGB colour space, there are different models for describing aspects of colours. These were originally developed for different purposes like television or computer graphics. Representations of these models are still found in many common image editing applications.
 

HSL represents the values of Hue, Saturation, and Lightness.
 
HSV represents Hue, Saturation, and Value (also referred to as Brightness)
 
HWB represents the values of Hue, Whiteness, and Blackness.
 
 
Hue is the colour wavelength on the visible spectrum
 
Saturation is the intensity of that colour, and;
 
Lightness describes lighter and darker variants of a colour.
 
Alpha-channel: in HSL-A colour or RGBa colour, the A represents the Alpha channel, or transparency of the colour, which is used in image editing and web design contexts to allow for transparent layers of colour to be represented.
 
Value/Brightness: this value is different to Lightness in HSL – it relates to how bright a colour is, not how light (pale) or dark a colour is.
 
Whiteness & Blackness – used in the HWB colour model, these values are different to Lightness and Brightness and represent how much white or black is mixed with the Hue.
 
It can be confusing to understand what these different values mean until you see them working in a practical way. Here is an interactive colour selector you can use to learn about different colour values. You can enter a colour value and it will display values for six different colour models.
 

Activity: type an RGB, HEX, or other set of colour values into the space provided and see the colour and values for each model.
 

 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=282 
 
 
Figure 3.23. Colour converter tool. Media attribution:  Interactive colour converter (JavaScript) by Derk Jan Speelman on CodePen

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-040-how-do-digital-image-and-video-file-formats-display-colour.xhtml =====

How do digital images and videos display colour?

 

 

 

 
Figure 3.24. Waveform (RGB) data from MP4 video. Image attribution: Waveform RGB data from MP4 video by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
Digital image and video objects record and store colour information in different ways depending on their format and encoding methods. When creating visual digital media content, we usually want to have the best quality image possible, but with the smallest file size possible to allow for fast internet download and rendering by software applications.
 

Topics covered on this page
 

Resolution
 
Compression and encoding
 
Image file formats
 
Digital video properties
 
Video codecs
 
 
 
 
 
Resolution
 
Both image and video files have properties such as Resolution, Width, Height, and File size.
 
Resolution is how much detail the image holds. This is measured by pixel count in digital images and video. Pixels are tiny squares or dots of colour that form the rectangular grid of an image or video’s visible area. The more pixels in your image, the higher the resolution and the more detail or information stored in the image. This also means better quality and colour.
 
You might notice on your digital camera or mobile phone how many megapixels the camera can capture. This is the total number of pixels (one megapixel equals 1,048,576 pixels, usually rounded down to 1,000,000 pixels) that can be recorded in a single image. Higher megapixels give a higher-quality image. If your camera can capture an image that’s 12 megapixels, this would be an image that is approximately 4290 x 2800 pixels in width and height.
 
Image resolution is important to understand if you’re working with screen and print media. We generally use a lower resolution image for screen media and content on the Internet because we want fast loading times, and our screens have a limited resolution display. For printing, a higher resolution is better for image quality. Printers can print at different resolutions depending on their capability. Commercial and professional printers can produce extremely high-resolution imagery necessary for fine art photography and publications. Your home inkjet printer can also print at different resolutions, depending on the quality of the printer.
 
Resolution in images is measured by the number of pixels in width multiplied by height, but also the density of those pixels – measured by dots per inch (DPI), which is how many dots/pixels are in a square inch. The higher the DPI, the better quality the image will be.
 

The image in Figure 3.25 on the left is low-resolution. It only has 1% of the pixels contained in the high-resolution image on the right – select the image to enlarge
 

 
Figure 3.25. Example of low and high resolution versions of the same image. Image attribution: Australian landscape by vaclav on Adobe Stock , licensed to RMIT University (Education licence) 
 
 
 
 
 
Have you ever seen an image on a webpage that looked great on your computer, but when you try to print it, it looks terrible?  This is because the screen image has a low resolution – possibly 72 DPI – and low dimensions – possibly 800 pixels width x 600 pixels height or less.
 
Your printer can produce images that are anywhere from 150 to 1200 DPI (or higher, depending on the printer), so your small image doesn’t have enough pixels to produce a good quality print image.
 
It’s important to save your image at the right resolution and dimensions for its purpose, and to use the right colour system – RGB for screens, CMYK for print.
 
 
 
Also important!! Once you have reduced an image’s resolution – width/height or DPI – and saved it, that information is lost. If you try to increase the resolution, your editing software compensates by duplicating or replacing pixels and filling in the space according to its encoding system, but it cannot replace that lost information, so you’ll still see a blocky and pixelated image. This affects the colour as well – the lost colour information cannot be replaced.
 
Many software editing applications have processes that attempt to compensate for the loss of information, and more recently Artificial Intelligence (AI) is increasingly used to ‘intelligently’ enhance image quality by replacing the lost information or repairing images that are damaged or blurry. These tools are useful, although if you work with very high-resolution images, image enhancement is no match for retaining the original image information.
 
Learn more about AI image enhancement from this article about AI super resolution (link opens in a new tab).
 
Compression and encoding
 
More pixels results in a bigger file size – which is the number of bytes (kilobytes, megabytes, gigabytes, terabytes, etc.) in the file. This can be problematic with video – even a short video can have thousands of frames and in theory, each frame is an image. Video files are much bigger in file size than still images.
 
Image and video files also store colour information in different ways.
 
Image file formats
 

RAW is a raster image format (based on a fixed grid of pixels) used for unprocessed images usually captured with a camera. There are many different RAW image formats, and these are often dependent on which camera you use. RAW images are ultimately converted to another format to be used for digital media (JPEG, PNG) or print (TIFF, high-quality JPEG).  Your camera or mobile device may have the settings option to save images as RAW or JPEG.
 
Note: RAW images will take up more file space on your device.
 
Think of a RAW image like a traditional physical photographic negative that can be reproduced in multiple formats (although a RAW image is not a negative image).  Keeping a RAW version of an image means that you have all the original information of the image, which can then be altered using non-destructive editing techniques to achieve a particular result. For example, you might change the exposure, brightness, contrast, and colour values of an image in your editing software and save that as a TIFF image file for printing, but you still have the original RAW file to return to if you want to create a different version of the image with different colour values.
 
Learn more about RAW (link opens in a new tab)

 Learn more about non-destructive editing (link opens in a new tab)
 
 
 
 

GIF (Graphics Interchange Format) was one of the first raster image formats used on the Internet. It has a very limited palette of colours available – only 256 colours. This is partly because it was created when bandwidth was much lower and slower than it is today. Only the smallest of image file sizes could be used to share images across networks or display graphics on web pages. Also, screens only displayed 256 colours at that time, so there was no requirement for more colour information. The innovative compression used in GIF identifies repeating patterns, then simplifies them, allowing for lossless compression of files –  meaning none of the data is trimmed in the shortening process (Lempel-Ziv-Welch compression algorithm).
 
GIF images can save different minimal colour ‘palettes’ – you can choose to save only the colours used in the image (indexed colour), which makes the file sizes very small. Because of the limitations of GIF image colour, it is a good format for simple graphics like logos but not good for photographic images. You can also save transparency in a GIF image – which is useful for something like logo design, where you might want a transparent background so that the same image can sit on different coloured backgrounds – for example, in webpages.
 
GIF was the first common image format that allowed animation (WebP images also allow animation, but are not commonly used at this time). Animated GIFs are multi-frame images that hold information like frame rate and looping properties. They have had a resurgence in popularity on social media and in meme culture because they are usually very short in timeframe and small in file size, therefore easy to access on mobile devices.
 
Learn more about GIF:
 
Smithsonian magazine: A Brief History of the GIF, From Early Internet Innovation to Ubiquitous Relic (link opens in a new tab)
 
 
 
 

The JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group) raster image format became a standard image format in the late 1980s and early 1990s. It allows for millions of colours in an image (24-bit colour), which is good for capturing photographic images. JPEG uses a system of lossy compression to reduce the amount of information in an image file and therefore reduce the image file size – making it a useful image format for the Internet.
 
It’s called ‘lossy compression’ because visual data that the human eye can’t see is removed, and colour variation is averaged, so some of the image information is lost in the compression process. You might have seen low quality JPEG images on websites or social media where the image looks blocky or has visible ‘artefacts’ (noise or aliasing on the edges) – this is due to the JPEG format compression.
 
The user can control the level of compression in a JPEG image – more compression results in a lower quality and smaller file size. Less compression results in a higher quality and bigger file size. Your image editing software will give you compression options when you save your image as a JPEG/JPG file.
 
Learn more about JPG:
 
JPEG.org: jpeg (link opens in a new tab)
 
Adobe: jpeg (link opens in a new tab)
 
 
 
 

SVG (Scalable Vector Graphic) is a very different kind of image format. It is not a resolution-dependent raster image format, rather, it is based on vector graphics, which are mathematical statements that describe lines, curves, shapes and colours on the Cartesian plane (x,y axis). This makes it scalable, so no matter how big or small you size the image, it will retain its quality – it redraws the geometric information at any size. Because an SVG file stores mathematical information and not pixel information, SVG files are generally very small and can also be used in websites as XML code.
 
This kind of graphic is generally not used for photographic images – calculating the vector maths for a complex photographic image would be less efficient than using pixels and compression formats. However, vector graphics are very useful for visual materials that need to be reproduced at different sizes in both digital and print media, such as advertising graphics output like posters, banners, billboards, signage, etc. Other common vector image file formats that digital media creators may encounter include EPS, AI, and PS.
 
Learn more about SVG (link opens in a new tab)
 
 
 
 
There are many, many more image file formats that are useful to know about when creating digital media, such as:
 
PNG – (Portable Network Graphic): raster image format good for photographic images, supports lossless compression and has millions of colours, transparency (PNG-24), and is commonly used in webpage design.
 
TIFF – (Tag Image File Format): raster image format popular with photographers for storing lossless, high-quality images for printing.
 
BMP – (Bitmap): a high-quality, uncompressed raster image format. Originally created by Microsoft.
 
HEIC – (High Efficiency Image Format): a more recent raster file format that has better quality than JPEG, using HEVC (High Efficiency Video Coding) for compression. It is now commonly used in Apple devices. A HEIC image may be half the size of a JPEG but with higher quality.

 Adobe: HEIC vs JPEG (link opens in a new tab)
 
WebP is a more recent raster image format developed for the web. It has better quality lossless and lossy compression compared to either PNG or JPEG. It uses predictive coding to compress the visual data, resulting in comparatively small file sizes, and is currently supported in recent browsers. You can also have animated WebP images.

 Google developers: WebP (link opens in a new tab)
 
There are also native image file formats that are the image files created by particular software applications. For example, Adobe Photoshop has a native file format that has the extension PSD. This file can only be used by Photoshop – you have to export a JPEG, PNG, GIF or another type of file from the Photoshop PSD file if you want to use your image on the Internet for example.
 
Learn more about image file formats from this video (14 minutes):
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=284#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: Explaining Image file Formats, Explaining Computers on YouTube
 
Digital video properties
 

Video files without compression are so big in file size that they would be very slow to download  – even with very fast Internet – and difficult to play without lagging ­and buffering.
 
If we didn’t have compression, you wouldn’t be able to stream videos from platforms like Netflix or Google Play.
 
 
 
 
A video file has certain properties:
 
Container – type of file – MP4, AVI, MOV, etc.
 
Dimensions/resolution – width and height in pixels (Figure 3.26).

 Some common video resolutions:
 
SD (standard definition) any video with a height of 480 pixels or less
 
HD (high definition) – 1280 x 720 pixels
 
full HD                        – 1920 x 1080 pixels
 
4K UHD (Ultra HD)  – 2048 x 1080 pixels
 
8K (full ultra HD)      – 3840 x 2160 pixels
 

This image shows the difference in video resolutions – select the image to enlarge
 

 
Figure 3.26. Video resolutions comparison. Image attribution:  Visual comparison between different video resolution sizes By Kaspars Grinvalds on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence). 
 
 
 
Learn more about video resolution here… Typito: video resolutions (link opens in a new tab)
 
Frame rate – how many frames per second (fps): 24 fps has been a standard frame rate for many years, 30 fps is used for TV broadcasts, 60 fps is becoming more common in 4K HD video, and for capturing slow motion footage, we see frame rates of 120 fps and higher, captured by high-speed cameras that can handle such high frame rates.
 
Duration: the length of a video in hours, minutes, and seconds (HH:MM:SS). For example, 01:30:24 describes a video duration that is one hour, 30 minutes and 24 seconds long.
 
Bit rate (bitrate) is the amount of data stored per each second in a media file (video and audio). It’s measured in megabytes per second (MBPS).
 
A high bitrate is associated with a high resolution and/or low compression, which means bigger file sizes.
 
A low bitrate is associated with a low resolution and/or high compression, which means smaller file sizes.
 
As with still images, you can’t turn a low-quality video into a high-quality video because there isn’t enough data about the pixel colours in each frame to increase the resolution or replace the data lost in compression. AI tools may be able to fill in and define low-resolution video to improve quality. For example, grainy, low-light video footage can be smoothed and better defined, but this functionality is limited and is not equal to capturing high-resolution video in the first place.
 
Learn more about bit rate (link opens in a new tab)
 
 
 
Video Codecs
 
Codec (a portmanteau word for coder-decoder) is the software encoding method that compresses video data and stores it in the container (file) so it can be decompressed and played back.
 
Video compression, as with image files, reduces the amount of colour information stored in the video file without visually altering what the viewer can see. Most video codecs are lossy – some of the data of an uncompressed video file is lost in the compression process, necessary to make file sizes small enough to play back smoothly and download quickly or stream at the right speed.
 
There are many different kinds of video and audio codecs, and they all use different compression methods to reduce file size. Codecs in video work by reducing the data by motion compensation, macroblocks (large blocks of pixels that have the same colour or motion) and chroma subsampling. 
 
Motion compensation uses keyframes – I-frames, P-frames and B-frames. I-frames contain the complete image, whereas P-frames look for which pixels have changed and only record the information for those changed pixels. I-, P- and B- frames make up what we call “groups of frames”, and this method can reduce the size of the video file by up to 90%. 
 
Chroma subsampling reduces the amount of colour information by using a different colour space instead of RGB. It’s a complex system to understand: the YCbCr colour space works for video because the human eye is more sensitive to changes in brightness than changes in colour. YCbCr represents the following colour information in video:
 
Y (luminance or luma)
 
Cb (blue-difference chroma)
 
Cr (red-difference chroma)
 
luma = brightness, chroma = colour
 
Some common video formats and their codecs:
 

MP4 (MPEG 4) – the MP4 container is the current industry standard for HD video. It most commonly uses the H.264 codec (also known as Advanced Video Codec or MPEG Part 10), which supports up to 8K video. It produces high-quality video at a low bitrate which means smaller file sizes – useful for streaming video content online.

 Wikipedia: Advanced Video Coding (link opens in a new tab)
 
 

MOV (Quicktime video format) is an Apple standard video format that usually uses MPEG-4 compression. In fact, the MPEG-4 format evolved from the Quicktime file format (QTFF) around 2001. MP4 is a revised version of this.
 
 

AVI (Audio Video Interleave) is a Windows standard video format created by Microsoft in 1992, which commonly uses the DivX codec.
 
 
 
 
Learn more about video formats, containers and codecs from this video (14 minutes):
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=284#oembed-2 
 
 
Media attribution: Explaining Digital Video: Formats, Codecs & Containers, Explaining Computers on YouTube
 
Learn more about video here: (links open in new tabs)
 
Basics of video encoding
 
Wikipedia: comparison_of_video_container_formats
 
Wikipedia: comparison_of_video_codecs

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-041-do-i-need-to-convert-an-rgb-image-to-cmyk-to-print-it.xhtml =====

Do I need to convert an RGB image to CMYK to print it?

 

 

 
Do I need to convert an RGB image to CMYK to print it?
 
You can send an RGB image directly to your home inkjet printer and it will print it out. However, this is relying on the printer’s software to convert your RGB image into CMYK for the four or more inks that your printer uses. You may not get the best result by doing this, and your printed images may not have the most accurate colour.
 
Note: some inkjet printers also have a grey ink cartridge – CMYKg (and some also have green and orange) – the grey ink is a dye, whereas the black ink is a pigment and not transparent. Grey ink is good for shades and mixing with the other colours.
 
If you convert your RGB image to CMYK in your image editing software, you have more options and control over how the image will look when printed, and most professional printers will ask for images already converted to CMYK.
 
Watch this video to see some examples of RGB to CMYK colour conversion in action. You don’t need to have Photoshop to convert your images, but it helps to have an image editor that has properties you can adjust to get the best results.
 
 
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=287#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: Essential Tips Converting RGB To CMYK | The Art Of Printing | Getting Started | Matt Irwin, Matt Erwin Photography on YouTube

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-042-spot-pantone-and-process-cmyk-colour-printing.xhtml =====

Process (CMYK) and Spot (Pantone) colour printing

 

 

 

 
Figure 3.28. Image attribution:  Large format printing machine in operation by DmyTo on Adobe Stock, licenced to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Colour printing can be complex and requires specific skills and knowledge to perfect. Print methods used depend on the type of print job and the colours you want to print.
 
Not all colours can be produced with Process colour (also called the four-colour process because of the four inks used – CMYK). Process colour printing mixes colours by laying down tiny dots in the printing process. Process colour is good for photographic images and complex images with subtle tones and shades, but it’s not good for some kinds of printing, like logos, packaging, or printing designs on fabric, like t-shirts.
 
Spot colour is what we call it when pre-mixed colours are used in the offset printing method (Figure 3.28). This method is preferred when a small set of exact colours are needed – or if colours are needed that can’t be mixed with the process method – such as pastels, fluorescents, or metallic colours. Spot colours are solid colours and are usually made with the Pantone colour-matching system. There are 18 basic inks that are used to mix all the Pantone colours.
 
Some printing jobs use both Process and Spot methods to achieve the best result. For example, some company logos require a very specific spot colour which can’t be reproduced with process printing, so a spot colour is added to the Process colour printing to get the exact colour.
 
There is also a third printing method called Extended Colour Gamut process colours. This method is recent and not yet as popular. It involves adding additional colours (orange, green and violet – OGV) to the CMYK colour printing method to extend the number of colours (the gamut) that can be printed – CMYK+OGV.
 
Designers often refer to Pantone colour swatch books (Figure 3.29) and online swatch charts to help select and match colours for printing. You will also find colour libraries, including Pantone, in your image editing software.
 
Visit these links for more information: (links open in new tabs)
 
Pantone: Spot vs process color
 
Adobe: Spot vs process color
 
Graphics Mob: How to find and add Pantone colors in Photoshop
 

 
Figure 3.29. Image attribution: Pantone sample colours catalogue by REDPIXEL on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-043-colour-management.xhtml =====

Figure 3.30. Image attribution: Worker checking print quality of media graphics proof in printing industry by Panumas on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Colour management is important to ensure colour is accurately represented across digital devices, screens and printing processes. It’s useful to know about if you are a graphic designer, photographer, printer, or any kind of colour worker.
 
This chapter has covered working with colour from a range of perspectives, like colour gamuts and systems, different kinds of digital media devices, and printing methods. All of these elements are affected by colour management. Sometimes, things can go wrong in colour processes – especially when transferring images between devices or outputting to printers.
 

What can you do to improve your colour management?
 

If you know what can go wrong, you will know what to look out for and how to solve any problems that might happen. Here are a few things that you can check in your own colour workflow processes that might be creating colour problems for you:
 
Screen colour problems (Calibration)

 If you are working with an old computer screen/monitor, or one that isn’t calibrated properly, you may not be able to see the correct colours in your digital media. Try calibrating your device screen to get the colours as accurate as possible. See How digital screens display colour in this resource for more information.
 
RGB to CMYK (Conversion)

 Not converting RGB images to CMYK before printing, as mentioned in Do I need to convert an RGB image to CMYK to print it? in this resource.
 
Image editing in CMYK instead of RGB

 This will not show you accurate colours on your computer, and may not let you use all the editing functions of your software. Check that you are editing your image in RGB to get the best results.
 
Colour loss from conversion

 Understanding the different colour systems and colour loss when converting from RGB and CMYK is useful. RGB is a bigger colour gamut than CMYK, so not all colours transfer from digital to print.
 
Do you have the right colour profile?

 If you’re not using the right colour profile or library when creating/editing your digital images, your colour may not print accurately. Learn about colour profiles here: Adobe: working with colour profiles (link opens in a new tab)
 
Colour correcting

 Learn how to use colour pickers and HSB settings to change the saturation or brightness of colours and adjust your images where necessary. See Other RGB colour models in this resource for more information.
 
Double colour management

 If your software and printer are both applying colour management to your image, you could end up with bad colour outputs – for example, your reds look too pink. Check your colour settings in your editing software and your printer.
 
Proofing and paper stock

 Print a sample (proof) first to check your colours and see how they look on different types of paper – then you can adjust your colour if it’s not looking the way you want it to. Different types of paper can affect how your colours print too.
 
 
 
 
 
Learn more about colour management issues here: (links open in new tabs)
 
Adobe: working with colour profiles
 
Colour management theory
 
Colour management guide

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-044-paint-pigments.xhtml =====

Colour pigments: history and usage

 

 

 

 
Figure 3.33 Artist’s palette. Image attribution: Artist’s palette by R. Gino Santa Maria on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
 
 
A timeline of colour pigments and dyes
 
Since pre-historic times, pigments have been used for painting and decoration. Pigments can be made from organic (plants and animals) or inorganic substances (minerals). Early pigments were made simply from grinding ochres found in earth and rocks into a powder that could be painted onto objects or bodies by mixing with water, oils or resins. Over time, cultural groups all over the world developed wider ranges of colours using more complex methods to extract colours, and they created various mediums for using these colours as paints and dyes.
 
Here is a list of many commonly known pigments and dyes, grouped roughly in chronological order by when they were first discovered and used. You can select any of these pigment or dye links to open a new tab with a Google search for each one, so you can begin your own research and learn more about what they are made from, where and when they were first discovered, and examples of their usage.
 
Timeline of pigments and dyes
 

 
Pre-history
 
Red, yellow and brown ochres | Lamp black | Bone black | Bone white | White chalk | Woad
 
 
 
Figure 3.34 Ochre pigment. Image attribution: ocher – background by ottoflick
 
Traditional Australian Indigenous Ochres
 
Watch this video by Aboriginal ElderYidumduma Bill Harney to learn about traditional Australian Indigenous ochres that have been used for millennia by the Yubulyawan clan of the Wardaman people of the Victoria River region in the Northern Territory of Australia:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=293#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: Red, White & Black Ochre, Paul Taylor on YouTube
 
 
 
 

 
Antiquity
 
Egyptian blue | Han purple | Han blue | Tyrian purple | Madder lake | Carmine lake | Lead white* | Realgar* | Malachite | Orpiment* | Azurite | Red lead* | Vermilion (cinnabar)* | Green earth | Chrysocolla | Sepia ink | Indigo | Saffron | Cochineal
 

 
Figure 3.35, Dyeing indigo cotton. Image attribution: Craftsmen of Thai indigo cotton… by Thirawatana
 
Watch this video to learn about Egyptian blue:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=293#oembed-2 
 
 
Media attribution: Egyptian Blue: How an Ancient Pigment Could Save Lives, SciShow  on YouTube
 
 
 
 

 
Mediaeval
 
Ultramarine (Lapis lazuli) | Lead tin yellow* | Smalt | Vine black | Kermes | Peach black | Dragon’s blood | Graphite | Lac | Gamboge* | Arzica (weld) | Brazilwood | Verdigris | Gall ink | Walnut | Stil de grain
 
 
 
Figure 3.36. Cinnabar vein in stone. Image attribution: Shining cinnabar vein in grey stone texture by Ekaterina
 
Watch this video to learn more about Dragon’s blood (jump to 3:02 for the start of the lecture):
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=293#oembed-3 
 
 
Media attribution: Saturday University: Dragon’s Blood and the Blood of Dragons Seattle Art Museum on YouTube
 
 
 
 

 
Renaissance & Enlightenment
 
Burnt Sienna | Burnt umber | Copper resinate | Naples yellow (antimony)* | Van Dyke brown | Cobalt green | Potter’s pink | Blue verditer | Mummy brown (caput mortuum) | Bistre | Logwood
 
 
 
Figure 3.37. Cobalt Oxide Green pigment. Image attribution: Cobalt Oxide Green pigment on a white background by Vantsura
 
Watch this video to learn the difference between raw and burnt earth pigments:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=293#oembed-4 
 
 
Media attribution: Raw vs Burnt Earth Colors, Walcott Fine Art on YouTube
 
 
 
 

 
Industrial Age and Modern
 
Prussian blue | French ultramarine | Chrome yellow | Chrome orange | Alizarin crimson | Cobalt blue | Cobalt yellow | Cobalt violet | Manganese violet | Scheele’s green* | Emerald green* | Cadmium red | Cadmium yellow | Lemon yellow | Viridian | Cerulean blue | Zinc white | Titanium white | Mars colours | Indian yellow | Mauvine (aniline purple) | International Klein Blue | Fluorescent pigments | Phosphorescent pigments
 
Figure 3.38. Violet silk. Image attribution: Black blue purple silk satin background…. by Наталья Босяк
 
Watch this video to learn more about the different types of white pigment used in artists’ paints:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=293#oembed-5 
 
 
Media attribution: Artist’s White paint: Zinc White Issues Malcom Dewey on YouTube
 
 
 
 

 
Contemporary (late 20th Century +)
 
YInMn blue | Vantablack | MIT black | Pinkest Pink | Thermochromic pigments (colour-change with heat) | Photochromic pigments (colour-change with light) | Bio-pigments from bacteria | Pearlescent pigments | Interference pigments (different colours from different angles)
 
Figure 3.39. Soap bubble. Image attribution: Brocken Inaglory, Soap bubble sky, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Watch this video to learn more about the recently developed YInMn blue pigment and other colours created by Mas Subramanian:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=293#oembed-6 
 
 
Media attribution: A Beautiful New. Blue Makes Its Debut, Oregon Public Broadcasting on YouTube
 
 
*toxic pigment
 
For more detailed information on pigments and how they are created and used, you can read this book, Chromatopia by David Coles, which has a detailed history of colour pigments and includes recipes for many colours you can make yourself:
 
Coles, David, and Adrian Lander. Chromatopia : an Illustrated History of Colour. Port Melbourne, Vic: Thames & Hudson, 2018 (link opens in a new tab)
 
There’s also a fun infographic: History of pigments  by Korwin Briggs, that gives a humorous summary of selected pigments mentioned on this page.
 
Other references (links open in new tabs):
 
Pigments through the ages: timeline
 
Indigenous Australian pigments

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-045-mixing-paint-pigments.xhtml =====

Mixing paint pigments

 

 

 
Pigments are not pure primary colours
 
Chapter 1 covered a history of colour theory that included the development of different systems of primary colours – like RYB, RYGB, RGB and CMYK. Learning about primary colours can help us understand how to mix different colours, but it doesn’t always help us to understand how subtractive colour mixing works in real and practical ways.
 
Most pigments (and dyes) are not pure primary colours. Pigments are made from substances that have a mixture of atoms that reflect a range of light waves. Paint mixing skills are important to learn in your creative practice.
 

 
Figure 3.40. Image attribution: Image attribution: Oil paint and brushes by Dmitry Pichugin on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
When you first learn how to paint – whether with watercolours, acrylic paints, oil paints or other types of mediums – you will usually start with a basic set of pre-mixed artist-quality paint colours that can be used to mix a wide variety of different colours.
 

A basic set of paint colours includes a mixture of warm and cool colours, and opaque and transparent colours. 
 

Some examples of this might include:
 
Two very different reds: cadmium red is an opaque, yellowish red, and alizarin crimson is a transparent, blueish red.
 
Two very different blues: Prussian blue is dark, cool, and transparent, and cobalt blue is intense, warm and opaque.
 
There are also many types of yellows and greens that are cool or warm, opaque or transparent.
 
There are also different types of black and white paint, and a range of earthy colours like umbers, siennas, ochres and browns.
 
You might also have violets and oranges in your paint set that can’t be mixed by combining other paint pigments.
 
There are also other special paints that might have metallic or pearlescent pigments mixed with other colours or different paint mediums.
 
 
 
 
 
You can add to your basic paint set if you want more colours. Art materials suppliers have a large range of artists’ paints with many colours to choose from. However, you probably don’t need every colour available. Your particular colour palette will ultimately depend on the colours you want to use in your artworks. It’s good to learn how to mix your own colours and avoid only using pre-made colours straight from the paint tube or pot.
 
If you are studying painting, you will learn how to mix the different pigments in your paint set to achieve a wide range of colours and avoid muddy or dull colours – unless you want neutral or subtle monochrome colours. You can learn to mix many tints, shades and tones of warm and cool greys or browns from your paints. Learn more about colour properties from the Colour wheel in this resource.
 
There are different paint mixing methods to create many colours in your artwork, such as:
 
physical mixing of two or more paints to create a different colour
 
glazing, which is overlaying transparent layers of different coloured paints to create a new colour
 
or by using methods similar to the Impressionist painters, who placed small dots or patches of colour next to each other to give the impression of another colour when viewed at a distance.
 
 
 

Artists’ paints are pigments that are mixed with different mediums:
 

Watercolour paints are pigments mixed with gum arabic.
 
Gouache paints are similar to watercolour but thicker and more opaque.
 
Inks can be made with pigments or dyes and can have different mediums, like water, solvents, gels, gum arabic, or shellac.
 
Acrylic paints are pigments mixed with an acrylic medium and there are different materials you can add to acrylics to make different textures for your paints.
 
Oil paints are pigments mixed with an oil base, like linseed oil, but can also include waxes, pumice and solvents to create different thicknesses or textures.
 
Enamels and lacquers are traditionally oil-based, with a hard, glossy finish – but you can also get acrylic resin-based versions.
 
Resin – traditional resins were made from natural materials like tree sap. Synthetic resins use a two-part epoxy system that has a synthetic polymer and a hardener. Once combined, a chemical reaction occurs which turns the two liquids into a hard, solid material.
 
Encaustic paint has a hot wax medium with pigments added to it.
 
Other types of paint include: Tempera (egg yolk) and Fresco (wet plaster), which are not often used in contemporary creative practice because they must be made at the time of painting and are not practical to store or transport.
 
 
 
You can use more than one type of paint medium in an artwork, but it’s important to learn which ones work together. For example, you can put oil paint on top of acrylic paint, but not the other way around. You can, in some cases, use different oil-based paints together, and different water-based paints together, but depending on the thickness or glossiness of the paint medium, this doesn’t always work well. There is a lot to learn about painting methods and techniques!
 
Why does red and blue make brown?
 
Watch this video to learn more about colour pigment mixing…
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=1874#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: Why Red and Blue Make Brown: Color Wheel Myth Dispelled, WriteArt on YouTube
 
You can also read this book to learn more about paint mixing:
 
Wilcox, Michael. Blue and Yellow Don’t Make Green. [2nd ed.]. Bristol: School of Colour, 2001. Print (link opens in a new tab)
 
David Briggs has a very detailed and technical explanation of colour mixing on his website: The Dimensions of Colour: Modern Colour Theory. Read the section about Mixing of Paints (link opens in a new tab) for more information.
 
 
 

 
The artist’s palette as a colour system
 
You can learn quite a lot about colour and painting techniques by studying the artworks of others. Some artists and art historians also like to delve deeper into an artist’s methods and processes by studying the paint pigments that the artist has used, and how they arrange their painting palettes to mix colours before applying them to their paintings.
 
Photographer Matthias Schaller has created a series of photographs of famous artists’ paint palettes – Das Meisterstück (The Masterpiece). He considers these to be a reflection of the artists’ work and has created over 200 of these images. You can view some examples here and here (links open in new tabs).
 
Digital tools have also been used to analyse the basic colour palettes of famous paintings to help artists and designers learn about colour relationships – view some examples here (link opens in a new tab).

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-046-dyes-history-and-techniques.xhtml =====

Colour dyes: a (very) short history of dyes from around the world

 

 

 

 
Figure 3.41 Indigo dyeing process. Image attribution: Cotton line dyeing with natural colors… by ownza on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Throughout history and across cultures and continents, dyes have been used for thousands of years to colour materials.  Many dyes were originally used to colour textiles – fibre-based materials such as threads, yarns or fabrics that are woven or knitted and made from plant or animal fibres, such as cotton, linen, flax, hemp, grasses, wool, silk, human hair, etc. Dyes were also used to stain wood, pottery, and animal hides.
 
Dyes are different to pigments because they are soluble (they can dissolve in water) and traditionally were mostly made from organic substances (plants or animals). Dyeing processes can also be more complex than working with paint pigments because the dye must be absorbed and held fast in the material it is colouring. Different techniques were developed over time to bind dye colours with the material to prevent the dye from washing out or fading too quickly.
 
Many of the discoveries for improving dyes throughout history relate to developing chemical processes for creating more vibrant colours, and for creating colours that last longer, which includes lightfastness andcolourfastness properties, and the ability to bind with materials they are absorbed into. The development of fixatives (known as mordants) was a necessary innovation to prevent dyes from being washed out of textiles, enabling long-lasting colour. Some methods were more successful than others, and evidence has been discovered of ancient textiles that still have some colour from dyeing.
 

Ancient discoveries
 

Archeologists have discovered examples of dyed textiles that date back to Neolithic times. One example is from around 10,000 BCE, in the Timna Valley, South Israel, where ancient copper and ore mining sites have been uncovered.  [1].
 
Another archeological example is the discovery of 30,000 year-old flax textiles found in Dzudzuana cave, located in the foothills of the Caucasus region in Georgia, Europe. The flax was dyed in many different colours, including “yellow, red, blue, violet, black, brown, green and khaki.”[2]
 
 
 
The Silk Road was an ancient trading route that ran from the Roman civilisation on the Mediterranean, through Afghanistan, the Levant and India, to the Xi’an region in northern China. This route was over 6,400 kilometres long! It was a pathway for trading between east and west cultures in many products such as spices, textiles, and precious metals. It was also the pathway for trading dyestuffs and knowledge about dyeing processes.[3]
 
Because of the Silk Road, and ancient maritime trade routes, many cultures had access to dyes that were not made from plants native to particular areas – including indigo, woad, saffron, madder, and safflower. Here are some (very) short stories about the history of selected dyes from locations around the world:
 
 
 

China and Japan 
 
In ancient Chinese silk production, colouring the thread began right from the first stage when the silkworm creates silk thread to form a cocoon. By feeding the silkworm white garden mulberry or wild mulberry leaves, the silk produced could be either white or yellow. Creating different coloured silk threads often involved bleaching it first by boiling threads in the ash of Lian tree fruit. Blue dye was made by fermenting indigo, black from iron vitriol, red from madder root or safflower, and yellow from Jinzi fruit.
 
The Ming (1368–1644) and Qing (1644–1911) Dynasties in China created very detailed records of types of dye and the dyeing methods and processes used. These records are an important historical resource for understanding how different natural substances were used to achieve the diverse and vibrant colours we associate with Chinese silk and other textiles.[4]
 
Japan has a long tradition of dyeing materials such as textiles, paper and wood, going back 2000 years. There are also records going back to the 7th century that document textiles dyed with red, blue, and other colours. These dyes were made from natural materials native to Japan, but also those that came via the Silk Road, maritime trade, and from the influences of Chinese and Korean textiles and dyeing methods. Evidence exists of textiles dyed with vermilion, sappanwood, cinnamon and Gunjyo – a blue pigment made from mining a mineral ore that had copper in it.[5]
 
Japan is also known for its indigo dye and textiles called Aizome. Indigo was introduced to Japan in the Heian period around the 7th Century CE. Since that time, techniques for creating indigo textiles have developed to become culturally significant, and Japanese indigo textiles are highly valued around the world.
 
 
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=297#oembed-1 
 
 
Media Attribution: The Link Between Japanese Samurai and Real Indigo, WhyNow – Great Big Story on YouTube
 
 
 
 

South-East Asia
 
Although Batik (wax resistance dyeing) is historically found in many places around the world, its origins in Java, Indonesia, are significant. Indonesian Batik was recognised by UNESCO in 2009 and placed on the Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity (link opens in a new tab).
 
Watch this video to learn more about the history and techniques of Batik:
 
 
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=297#oembed-2 
 
 
Media Attribution: What is Batik? Historically Speaking, Ours For All on YouTube
 
 
 
 
 
 

India
 
India’s ancient history of dyes is significant. Not only did they produce many dyes and techniques for achieving vibrant colours, but they also developed mordants and processes to fix the dyes, which were closely guarded secrets for a long time. Indian textiles were highly prized across Europe. The name “Indigo” is a reference to India, where the plant Indigofera Tinctoria was grown, although it was also found in much of Asia and parts of Africa too.
 
The ancient Sanskrit texts, known as the Vedas (meaning “knowledge”), are the oldest Hindu texts known to exist – from around 1500-500 BCE. These contain details about textiles and clothing worn at different times of the year or at religious ceremonies, with reference to multiple colours. From these texts, we know that Indian dyeing techniques for creating vibrantly coloured fabrics existed around that time.
 
Tie-dye, known as Bahndani (meaning “to tie up”), is also accredited to Indian culture, going back thousands of years. Other techniques like Batik and Ikat were also used with dyed yarn or woven fabrics. India was one of the first places to produce cotton in large quantities, and produced many dyed cotton textiles that were traded in other countries.
 
This video explains the history of Indigo dye:
 
 
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=297#oembed-3 
 
 
Media Attribution: The History of Indigo Dye, Merit Store on YouTube
 
 
 
 
 
 

Egypt and Persia (North Africa & Middle East)
 
Ancient Egyptians wore mostly white linen textiles, but they also dyed fabrics in a range of colours. They used Madder for red dye, Safflower for yellow, Indigo or woad for blue, and Murex snails for purple (Tyrian purple was originally made by the Phoenicians).
 
Ancient Persians also developed rich colours using dyes like runas (madder), red grain (kermes or cochineal beetles), walnut, neel (indigo), vine leaves, and other plant materials. Methods for dyeing wool and silk with these diverse colours coincided with the creation of woven and knotted carpets – something we still associate with Persian culture today.
 
The first carpets date back over two thousand years and were created by nomadic tribes and royal courts. Each group would have their own designs and colours which reflected the history and symbolism that was important to the creators. Carpets created during the Safavid Empire (1501-1736) are world famous for their intricate designs using intense colours, and there are many examples held in museums around the world – here is one example shown in Figure 117.
 

 
Figure 3.42. Hunting Carpet made by Ghyath ud-Din Jami, Wool, cotton and silk, 1542–1543, Museo Poldi Pezzoli, Milan. Image attribution: Ghyas el Din Jami – Weaver (Persian)

 Born in North-West Persia. Died in North-West Persia.

 Google Art Projectでのアーティストの詳細, Ghyas el Din Jami – Tabriz (?) – Google Art Project, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Watch this video to see the restoration of a Safavidic carpet:
 
 
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=297#oembed-4 
 
 
Media Attribution: Conserving the Emperor’s Carpet, The Met on YouTube
 
 
 
 

West and South Africa
 
There are many different types of dyes and textile designs that come from the many countries and regions in Africa. Groups develop their own designs with colours that have symbolic and cultural meanings. Techniques such as batik and tie-dyeing developed in African cultures, and common dyes included indigo, kola nut (brown), annatto (a yellow and orange colour), and earth colours.
 
Visit this website: The Fabric of Africa  (link opens in a new tab), on Google Arts and Culture, to see many beautiful and diverse examples of African textiles from different parts of Africa.
 
This video shows the work of artisans who practice West African (Nigeria, Ghana and Mali) ancient textile traditions: Adire, Adinkra and Bogolan ‘Mud cloth’. (19 minutes)
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=297#oembed-5 
 
 
Media Attribution: West African Textiles, BurroGrande Films on YouTube
 
 
 
 
 
 

Greek, Roman and other Mediterranean civilisations
 
Ancient Greek, Roman and neighbouring civilisations used a range of plant and animal dyes to create coloured textiles. Plant dyes included crocus sativus (ochres), madder, woad, weld (yellow), walnut hulls, oak gall (brown and black), orchil lichen (pink/purple), alchanet (red), and saffron crocus (yellow).
 
Animal dyes included kermes beetles (red/cochineal) and seashell creatures such as Hexaplex trunculus, Bolinus brandaris, and Stramonita haemastoma, which created a purple dye similar to the Murex sea snail that was used by the Phoenicians and Romans to create Tyrian purple.[6].
 
Watch this video for more details about how Tyrian purple was created:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=297#oembed-6 
 
 
Media Attribution: Tyrian Purple | History of Colours, Little Art Talks on YouTube
 
 
 
 

British Isles and North/West Europe
 
Civilisations from the British Isles and Western Europe used a range of plant materials to create diverse dye colours. Despite being grown across southern Europe and the Caucasus, Britain is primarily known for its woad (Isatis Tinctoria) dye, perhaps because of the legends of Boudicca and the Iceni tribe, who painted their faces with the blue dye. The Celts also used it as body paint and possibly tattoo ink – Romans referred to the Celts as “Picts” (Picti means painted people in Latin) because of their blue tattooed bodies. Evidence of plant materials goes back as far as the Iron Age, and the plant was used for medicinal purposes as well as dye.
 
Vikings created their own dyes from local plant materials, but they also traded for colours like woad, indigo, madder and cochineal to create more vibrant colours than they could make from local ingredients. They used small amounts of dyes to create decorative edgings on their textiles rather than dyeing entire fabrics.  They also used a range of available mordants to fix the dye colour, such as iron, tin, copper, and alum.
 
Watch this video to learn about traditional dyeing methods, including the use of different mordants that would have been available during the Iron Age (1200 – 550 BCE) in Europe.
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=297#oembed-7 
 
 
Media Attribution: Iron Age Dyes: Woad, Weld & Madder, Sally Pointer on YouTube
 
 
 
 

North America
 
Many plants were used by Indigenous Northern Americans to create a wide range of dye colours, such as sumac, bloodroot, alder, cottonwood and black walnut.  Early western colonisers noted that native coloured textiles tended to fade quickly, so it is thought that coloured dyes were used in a direct or substantive dyeing method where mordants were not used.[7]
 
Blue Jeans, Denim and Dungarees

 ‘Bleu de Gênes’ was made from “bastard indigo”, a plant related to Indigofera, called Amorpha Fruticosa. It was used to produce a blue dye for sail cloth that became known as ‘Bleu de Gênes’ (the blue of Genoa – from Italy), shortened to “jeans“.
 
‘Tenue de Nîmes’ (Clothes from Nîmes – from France), short name “de Nîmes”, was a textile developed in the 17th century that had a twill weave using one light thread and one dark thread, so the fabric was dark on the outside and light on the inside. The English and Americans eventually turned the name of this textile into what we now know as ‘denim.’[8].
 
The term “dungarees” most likely comes from a sturdy cotton textile made in Dungri, Gujarat, India, that was often coloured with indigo dye.
 
Although they originated in Europe and India, these blue textiles are now associated with American culture due to the production of the clothing item we call “blue jeans”. In 1853 a German immigrant, Levi Strauss founded his company in San Francisco, USA, which stocked “denim” fabric. In 1873, Latvian emigrant and tailor Jacob Davis and Levi Strauss patented and manufactured the “XX” pants, which became known as Levi 501s. These are claimed to be the world’s first blue jeans. These jeans had metal rivets on the pockets and a button-fly, which made them tough and suitable as workwear.
 
Claims that Levis were the first “blue jeans” are disputed by some historians who point to evidence that similar garments were first created by enslaved black people working the indigo and cotton plantations in Southern states. These enslaved plantation workers needed tough working clothes for the hard labour that was part of plantation life. They had ready access to the cotton that came from the plantations to produce the fabric, and they had the cultural knowledge from their African homelands to know how to dye the fabric with indigo – which also had anti-fungal and antibacterial properties.
 
According to these historians, Davis and Strauss merely added metal rivets to their work pants design and patented the product. [9]
 
Watch this video for an overview of the origins of blue jeans:
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=297#oembed-8 
 
 
Media Attribution: Where Did Blue Jeans Begin? | Riveted: The history of Jeans, American Experience | PBS on YouTube
 
 
 
 

Central and South America
 
Indigo was used in Central and South American civilisations. There is evidence that it was used in the Andes as far back as 6200 years ago – which predates its use in India, Egypt and other ancient civilisations.[10]
 
Maya blue was “made by burning incense made from tree resin and using the heat to cook a mixture of indigo plants and a type of clay called palygorskite”. The process of mixing the indigo and tree resin with clay created a long-lasting colour that didn’t fade. In fact, the discovery of artefacts containing this dye has led to physicists developing their own modern version that is resistant to fading and weathering.[11].
 
Relbun (similar to madder) was used to create red dye over 2000 years ago, but the advent of using cochineal beetles around the 5th Century CE changed dye production in places likes Mexico and Peru. Cochineal became a valuable commodity used for trading and was worth as much as silver to Spanish colonisers. For many years, the Spanish claimed that cochineal was a seed and hid the fact that it was an animal product – to prevent others from breaking their trading monopoly.
 
Watch this video to learn more about cochineal:
 
 
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=297#oembed-9 
 
 
Media Attribution: Cochineal Origins, Harvard Museums of Science and Culture on YouTube
 
 
 
 

Australia 
 
Australia has Indigenous cultures that have used dyes from a variety of plants, minerals and animal products to colour fibres used for textiles, basket weaving, knotting, and other products for many thousands of years. Different language groups around the continent developed their own knowledge bases using different methods and diverse local materials they found in their geographic locations.
 
Select the link below to watch this video on YouTube, which shows the bundle dyeing technique using native plants to colour fabric – from Boon Warrung, Wurundjeri and Ngarluma Country. Included are eucalyptus leaves, for yellow, grey or purple colours, eucalyptus bark for purples, and acacia leaves, which can create orange or red colours:
 
Create unique coloured patterns on fabric using native plants | My Garden Path | Gardening Australia on YouTube (link opens in a new tab)
 
 
 

 
Figure 3.43. Eucalyptus tereticornis buds, capsules, flowers and foliage, Rockhampton, Queensland. Image attribution:L Ethel Aardvark, Eucalyptus tereticornis flowers, capsules, buds and foliage, CC BY 3.0
 
 
 
 
Further resources (links open in new tabs)
 
Abel, A. 2012, “The history of dyes and pigments: From natural dyes to high performance pigments” Colour Design: Theories and Applications. pp.433-470. 10.1533/9780857095534.3.433.
 
Samanta, Ashis Kumar, Nasser Awwad, and Hamed Majdooa Algarni. Chemistry and Technology of Natural and Synthetic Dyes and Pigments. Edited by Ashis Kumar Samanta, Nasser Awwad, and Hamed Majdooa Algarni. London: IntechOpen, 2020.
 
Delamare, Francois., and Bernard. Guineau. Colour : Making and Using Dyes and Pigments. London: Thames & Hudson, 2000.
 
Papadakis, Raffaello. Dyes and Pigments : Novel Applications and Waste Treatment. Edited by Raffaello Papadakis. London: IntechOpen, 2021.
 
 
 

Sukenik N, Iluz D, Amar Z, Varvak A, Workman V, Shamir O, Ben-Yosef E. "Early evidence (late 2nd millennium BCE) of plant-based dyeing of textiles from Timna, Israe"l PLoS On,. 2017 Jun 28;12(6):e0179014. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0179014. PMID: 28658314; PMCID: PMC5489155. (link opens in a new tab) ↵

Kvavadze, Eliso, Bar-Yosef, O., Belfer-Cohen, A. Boaretto, E., Jakeli, N., Matskevich, Z., and Meshveliani. T.  2009. "30,000 Years old wild flax fibers - Testimony for fabricating prehistoric linen", Science 325(5946): 1359. p.2. (link opens in a new tab) ↵

Britannica, T. Editors of Encyclopaedia. 2023 "Silk Road." Encyclopedia Britannica, <https://www.britannica.com/topic/Silk-Road-trade-route>, accessed 03/01/2023 (link opens in a new tab) ↵

Han, J. and Quye, A. 2018, "Dyes and Dyeing in the Ming and Qing Dynasties in China: Preliminary Evidence Based on Primary Sources of Documented Recipes". Textile History. 1-27. 10.1080/00404969.2018.1440099.  (link opens in a new tab) ↵

Yoshioka, s. 2010, "History of Japanese Colour: Traditional Natural Dyeing Methods", Colour: Design & Creativity, Society of Dyers and Colourists  p. 1, <https://www.aic-color.org/resources/Documents/jaic_v5_gal2nar.pdf>, accessed 04/01/2023 (link opens in a new tab) ↵

Artextiles.org, 2017, "Dyes", Artext: Hellenic Centre for Research and Conservation of  Archeological textiles,<https://artextiles.org/en/content/dyes>, accessed 21/12/2022 (link opens in a new tab) ↵

U.S. Forest Service, "Native Plant Dyes", U.S. Forest Service, United States Department of Agriculture, <https://www.fs.usda.gov/wildflowers/ethnobotany/dyes.shtml> accessed 02/01/2023 (link opens in a new tab) ↵

Stege Bojer, T. 2007, "The History of Indigo Dyeing and How It Changed the World", Medium.com, <https://medium.com/@tsbojer/the-history-of-indigo-dyeing-and-how-it-changed-the-world-35c8bc66f0e9>, accessed 01/01/2023 (link opens in a new tab) ↵

Coard, M. 2022, "Enslaved Blacks invented blue jeans", The Philedelphia Tribune, March 1, 2022 <https://www.phillytrib.com/commentary/michaelcoard/enslaved-blacks-invented-blue-jeans/article_57de5262-5b78-534d-a133-bfc406f87a78.html>, accessed 23/12/2022 (link opens in a new tab) ↵

Annalee Newitz - Sep 15, 2016 8:53 pm U.T.C. (2016) World's most valuable dye existed in Peru 1,800 years before anywhere else, Ars Technica. Ars Technica. Available at: https://arstechnica.com/science/2016/09/worlds-most-valuable-dye-existed-in-peru-1800-years-before-anywhere-else/ (Accessed: January 9, 2023). (link opens in a new tab) ↵

Powell, D. "Ancient Mayans Inspire Modern Fade Proof Dye", Phys.org, July 30, 2010 <https://phys.org/news/2010-07-ancient-mayans-modern-proof-dye.html> accessed 03/01/2023 (link opens in a new tab) ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-047-colour-dyes-methods-and-processes.xhtml =====

Colour dyes: methods and processes

 

 

 

 
Figure 3.44. Image attribution: Colorful silk thread from natural dye color to weaving by thanasak on Adobe Stock, licensed to MRIT University (Education licence)
 
Early dye processes involved soaking and boiling textiles in coloured solutions made from substances such as roots, berries, bark, leaves, wood, fungi, and animal products in a direct or substantive dyeing method. However, these dyed textiles may not have had a very lasting colour. It was eventually discovered that different methods could be used to create stronger colours and to fix the colours so they didn’t fade or wash out so quickly.
 
Some methods used fermentation to create a strong colour, as with Indigo, woad and madder. For example, the indigo plant isn’t actually blue. The blue colour only comes from soaking the leaves to release the indican amino acid, which is then fermented by other plant enzymes – a process called indoxyl. It is left to dry in the air, which oxidises it, creating a blue colourant. An indigo dye bath looks green – it’s only when the dyed material is brought into the air that it oxidises and turns blue before your eyes.
 
Dyes like Madder can also be turned into pigments by “laking” (hence the term “madder lake”) – which means the dye is combined with a mineral salt to produce an oil-soluble substance that can be used like a paint pigment.
 
A mordant, which was often a type of mineral salt like sodium chloride (table salt), alum or copper vitriol, or another substance like vinegar, or even stale urine, was used to fix the dye so it wouldn’t wash out of the fabric.
 
Many of these processes smell terrible!
 
Synthetic dyes changed the complex and labour-intensive methods of natural dyeing. Many synthetic dyes are made from petrochemical processes, or from other chemicals that can be manufactured in large quantities in industrial settings like factories, and are relatively inexpensive in comparison with some natural dyes. There are many types of synthetic dyes, such as reactive dyes, disperse dyes, base and acid dyes, sulphur dyes, aniline dyes, azo dyes etc. Different types of dyes and dyeing methods suit different types of materials.
 
Most dyeing processes today are for textile production. The three types of fibres that are commonly used for textiles today are:
 
Cellulose: cotton, flax, linen, hemp, viscose/rayon/modal (made from bamboo or other plant fibres)
 
Protein: wool, mohair, silk
 
Synthetic: nylon, polyester, acrylic, acetate
 
Here are some of the common dyes and dye techniques used in industry today:
 

Reactive dyeing method
 
Fibre-reactive dyes are commonly used for fabrics made from cotton, linen, viscose wool and silk. This type of dye “reacts” with the fibre it is colouring because of a chromophore that creates a chemical link with the fibre, binding the colour to it. The colour then becomes part of the fibre. It usually has a good level of colour fastness. Cold water dyes like Procion dyes are fibre reactive and use soda ash in the dyeing process. They do not need mordants and are non-toxic.
 
 
 
 

Disperse dyeing method
 
This is a high-temperature dye made from fine, insoluble dye particles that are from a suspension. They are suited to hydrophobic fibres (they don’t absorb water) such as synthetics.
 
 
 
 

Direct dyeing method
 
Also called Substantive dye, this method is used for cotton, and although lightfast, washes out easily. It’s called “direct” because the dye is absorbed into the fibres without help from other chemicals, such as mordants.
 
 
 
 

Vat dyeing method
 
Vat dyeing is still used for some textiles. Natural Indigo is one of the original vat dyeing methods, where textiles are soaked in the vat until the right colour strength is achieved. This may require more than one soaking in the vat to deepen the colour.
 
 
 
 

Basic and acid dyes
 
Basic (alkaline) and acid dyes are water-soluble dyes. Basic dyes are used for acrylic fibres, and acid dyes are used for wool, silk and nylon fibres.
 
 
 
 

Sulfur dye
 
Sulfur dyes are used for cotton and other cellulose fibres, and also for blended fibres that contain cotton mixed with polyester or acrylic fibres.
 
 
 
 
 

Chrome dye
 
Chrome dyes were synthetic dyes developed in the early 20th Century and commonly used on wool for carpet manufacture, with the use of a chemical to allow the dye to penetrate the fibre. They have good light and colour fastness properties.
 
 
 
 
 

Azo dye
 
Azo dyes are synthetic dyes used in a variety of products, including textiles, leather, foods, cosmetics and carpets. Certain Azo dyes are considered harmful because they can break down into a carcinogenic compound called Aromatic Amines (including benzidine), and can trigger toxic effects such as allergic reactions, tumours, and endocrine disruptions. Although Azo dyes are banned in the UK and restricted in the USA, they are allowed in Australia.[1]
 
 
 
 
Learn more about the dangerous history of synthetic dyeing methods and processes from this video:
 
 
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=1865#oembed-1 
 
 

Media Attribution: Fashion that SLAYED!? A History of Fabric Dyes (and all the damage early chemical dyes did), Emily Snee on YouTube
 
 
 
 

Australian Competition and Consumer Commission(ACCC), c.2021, "Azo Dyes", Product Safety Australia, <https://www.productsafety.gov.au/products/chemicals/azo-dyes>, accessed 08/01/2023 (link opens in a new tab) ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-048-colour-dyes-synthetic-colours-and-sustainability.xhtml =====

Colour dyes: synthetic colours and sustainability

 

 

 
Impact of synthetic colour development
 
Egyptian blue[1] was one of the first synthetically created pigments, made from crushed blue glass (silica and copper) over two thousand years ago. Although synthetic pigments and dyes have existed throughout history, it wasn’t until the industrial era that there was a boom in chemical synthetic colours that were relatively cheap and easy to make and therefore used in industry for the mass production of paints and dyes, which were used in products like textiles, paper, plastics, and many other materials.
 
Prussian blue was the first chemical synthetic colour accidentally created by Johann Jacob Diesbach in 1704. One of the first synthetic dyes to be mass-produced was a mauve colour called Mauveine (also known as Aniline purple and Perkin’s mauve). It was also accidentally discovered by William Henry Perkin in 1856 while he was trying to create the chemical quinine, which was used at that time for the treatment of malaria.
 
Mauvine

 #8D029B
 

 
 
 
Many of the synthetic colours we now use in artist paints and industrial practices (Figure 3.45) are safer and cheaper options than the equivalent pigments from the past. Older colours like realgar, vermilion and emerald green are highly toxic due to their chemical compounds which include lead, mercury, arsenic or other dangerous materials that are harmful to human health. Many people became ill or died from the creation and use of pigments and dyes containing these toxic substances. Learn more about this in Special colours, controversial colours and interesting facts on the next page.
 

 
Figure 3.45. Image attribution: chemical color pigments by roostler on Adobe Stock, licensed to MRIT University (Education licence)
 
 
 
Hair dyes
 
People have been dyeing their hair for thousands of years too! Ancient cultures used natural dyes like Henna, Indigo, Tumeric, Senna, Walnut and Cochineal to dye their hair a range of colours, such as red, orange, yellow, black, brown, or even green. Some ancient people like the Celts also bleached their hair with lime or other substances that would strip the hair of colour.
 
Natural dyes can create unpredictable results because they may have different amounts of reactive substances and colourants, and they also tend to fade over time. Some products, like “black henna” (which is not actually henna), can cause extremely serious allergic reactions and are banned in many countries.
 
Synthetic hair dyes were first developed in the late 19th century. French company L’Oréal was the first company to manufacture synthetic hair dyes around 1907, and the German company Schwarzkopf was the first to create at-home hair dyes in 1947. Today, hair dye products are a huge industry and are available in a wide range of colours – in fact, all the colours of the spectrum (Figure 3.46), as well as natural colours and treatments that bleach or lighten the hair.
 
There are temporary and permanent dyes that can be used to colour hair (including facial hair). However, some colours are more lightfast than others, and even colours classed as “permanent” can still wash out or fade – especially colours like violets, blues and greens, which are more fugitive dye colours. You can also now get hair dyes that fluoresce in UV light – known as blacklight-reactive hair dyes.
 

 
Figure 3.46. Rainbow-coloured hair. Image attribution: A rainbow colored hairstyle of a woman who visits the lesbian and gay street party in Berlin-Germany by Frank Middendorf on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Sustainability, waste and pollution from making and using dyes
 
Dye production and usage (both natural and synthetic dye) has had a problematic history due to the use of petrochemicals to create synthetic colours, the use of water in the dyeing process, and the creation of wastewater from the washing process.
 
Since the advent of industrial and synthetic dye-making processes (Figure 3.47), and industrial use of dyes for producing textiles and other materials, industries working with dyes have caused a lot of pollution and used great quantities of clean water.
 
New methods are being developed that seek to reduce waste in dye production and usage, to create a more sustainable industry. This also impacts broader issues in the fashion industry relating to clothes wastage and sustainability.
 
These articles have more information on this topic (links open in new tabs):
 
Pailliè-Jiménez M E, Stincone P, Brandelli A 2020, “Natural Pigments of Microbial Origin”, Frontiers in Sustainable Food Systems,  Vol 4, 2020, viewed 07/12/2022, <https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fsufs.2020.590439>, DOI=10.3389/fsufs.2020.590439, accessed December 21, 2022
 
Bealle, A. (2020) Why clothes are so hard to recycle, BBC Future. BBC. <https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20200710-why-clothes-are-so-hard-to-recycle>, accessed: January 3, 2023
 
Lellis, B. Zani Fávaro-Polonio, C.  Alencar Pamphile, J. Cesar Polonio, J, 2019, “Effects of textile dyes on health and the environment and bioremediation potential of living organisms”, Biotechnology Research and Innovation, Vol 3, Issue 2, 2019, Pages 275-290,

 ISSN 2452-0721, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biori.2019.09.001.<>, accessed 04/01/2023
 

 

 
Figure 3.47. Image attribution: Dyeing Machine Chemical Tanks by Voy_ager on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 

Pradell, T., Salvado, N., Hatton,G.D., Tite, M.S., 2006, "Physical Processes Involved in Production of the Ancient Pigment, Egyptian Blue", Journal of the American Ceramic Society, Volume89, Issue4, April 2006, pp. 1426-1431, https://doi-org.ezproxy.lib.rmit.edu.au/10.1111/j.1551-2916.2005.00904.x (link opens in a new tab) ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-049-special-colours-and-fun-facts.xhtml =====

Special colours, controversial colours and interesting facts

 

 

 

 
Figure 3.48. Fluorescent paints. Image attribution: Abstract vibrant multi-color wet paint drops and splotch on black background by NadiaA on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
The history and stories of some pigments and dyes are curious, and sometimes controversial. Here are a selection of interesting colours and fun facts:
 

Topics covered
 

Luminescent and special effects pigments and dyes
 
Trademarked colours
 
 
 
 
 
Luminescent and special effects pigments and dyes
 
In Chapter 2, the page about Luminescence explains the chemistry of fluorescence and phosphorescence. But making fluorescent and phosphorescent pigments involves complex processes that involve both chemistry and physics. There are also special effects pigments that change colour under different conditions.
 
There are different kinds of fluorescent and phosphorescent colourants that can react with UV light as well as visible sunlight. Some can even react with infrared light waves. Capturing fluorescent or phosphorescent effects requires very specific treatment of the pigment particles. Theses types of pigments must be mixed with a stable medium that can be used as a paint or printing ink that will last.
 
Fluorescent pigments
 
Fluorescent pigments (See Figure 3.48 at the top of the page) can be made from organic or inorganic substances. The pigments don’t fluoresce in their solid state, but if they are dissolved in a thermoplastic or thermoset carrier resin and then ground into a fine powder, they become fluorescent pigments [1].
 

 
Phosphorescent pigments
 
We are familiar with phosphorescent pigments that are used as “glow-in-the-dark” paints and pigments that can be mixed with plastics (Figure 3.49). These pigments are made from phosphors that capture light (photons) and store the energy, emitting it slowly as photons over a period of time after light exposure. An example of this would be a glow-in-the-dark toy that absorbs sunlight or even artificial light, and then releases it at night-time or when all lights are removed.
 
Copper-activated zinc sulfide, called GS phosphor, is often used as the phosphor in toys, whereas a more powerful substance like strontium aluminate is used for road signs, road surface lines, and warning signs. Phosphorescent pigments can be mixed into paint mediums, waxes or plastics. They have many different uses.
 

 
Figure 3.49. Phosphorescent (glow-in-the-dark) paint – hand prints. Image attribution: Spooky hands prints by Igor Kovalchuk
 
Photochromic and Thermochromic dyes and pigments
 
Photochromic pigments and dyes have a reversible (or sometimes irreversible) colour change when exposed to light rays. Some can go from transparent to coloured, as in optical lenses (transition lenses) that get darker when worn outside in sunlight, and become clear again when entering a darker space. Other common examples can be found in nanofibres in smart textiles, in toys, and as UV warnings for sunburn. 
 
Photochromic pigments contain microencapsulated photochromic dye mixed into a synthetic resin. The colour change happens when light exposure triggers a chemical reaction that changes which light waves are reflected and absorbed, thus changing the colour. When the light is removed, the chemical reaction dissipates and the pigment goes back to its original colour.  
 
Thermochromic pigments have a reversible (or sometimes irreversible) colour change when heat is applied to the pigment. Applied heat triggers a chemical reaction to occur that changes the light waves that are reflected and absorbed, thus changing the colour. Examples include textiles, objects like coffee cups, toys, and food packaging. Colour change labels can detect if food packages have been exposed to temperatures that might spoil the edible contents. Figure 3.50 shows a short video clip of a thermochromic coffee mug changing colour when boiling water is poured into it.
 
 
 

https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/app/uploads/sites/42/2022/10/Thermochromic_mug.webm 
Figure 3.50. Thermochromic “Magic” Mug.  Media attribution: Magic mug, WEBM video from Wikimedia commons
 
Pearlescent and Interference pigments – structural colouration
 
Pearlescent and interference pigments are usually created with complex and multi-layered paints that appear to have different colours when viewed from different angles.
 
You might have noticed similar phenomena like oil slicks, soap bubbles and peacock tail feathers that appear to have rainbow colours or two or three different colours when moving. It’s an optical phenomenon where surfaces appear to change colour depending on the angle they are viewed from.
 
Iridescence  (link opens in a new tab) (also known as goniochromism – from the Greek gonia = angle, chroma = colour) is the name for this effect.
 
This example in Figure 3.51 is called ChromaFlair – it’s a pigment for automotive paint. You can see in the image that the paint finish on this car appears to be different colours depending on the angle you are viewing the surface from. The curves of the car body show different colours because they are at different angles to the camera. This type of effect is also called Structural colouration (link opens in a new tab).
 

 
Figure 3.51. TVR Tuscan Speed Six car painted with ChromaFlair interference pigment. Image attribution: Mytho88, TVR Tuscan 01, CC BY-SA 3.0 from Wikimedia commons
 
Trademarked colours
 
There are certain colour pigments that have been developed by individuals or organisations who have tried to limit the use of their colour with trademarking. Many companies have tried to trademark their logo colours or signature product colours, but this has only been partly successful. One successfully trademarked colour is Tiffany Blue (link opens in a new tab), which is a colour developed by Pantone for the jewellery company Tiffany & Co. This colour can’t be used by anyone except Tiffany for their packaging.
 
Yves Klein: International Klein Blue
 
Around 1960, French artist Yves Klein collaborated with artist paint maker Edouard Adam to develop a deep and vibrant blue pigment with a matte, powdery quality, which is similar in colour to a synthetic ultramarine. Klein called the pigmentInternational Klein Blue (IKB) and he used the pigment mixed with resin in many monochromatic artworks – some abstract (Figure 3.52), and others figurative, often using naked female models covered in the paint who would then press their bodies onto canvas. Klein registered the pigment so that others couldn’t use it. However, Adam still sells this pigment today under the name Médium Adam 25.
 

 
Figure 3.52. Artwork L’accord Bleu by Yves Klein, 1960, using International Klein Blue pigment. Image attribution: Jaredzimmerman (WMF), L’accord bleu (RE 10), 1960, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Vantablack (Anish Kapoor controversy)
 
Sculptor Anish Kapoor bought exclusive rights to use the paint Vantablack, which was developed by Surrey NanoSystems in 2014 and originally created for use in military and astronautical industries. Vantablack was the “blackest” black pigment at that time, which could absorb up to 99.965% of light. This means that it barely reflects any light, so objects that are covered in this pigment look like a void or black hole (Figure 3.53).
 
Kapoor’s actions caused controversy in the art world because a lot of artists and critics don’t think that art materials should be restricted. Many believe materials like this should be available for anyone to use.
 

 
Figure 3.53. A sample of Vantablack pigment covering aluminium foil. Image attribution: Surrey NanoSystems, Vantablack 01, CC BY-SA 3.0
 
Stuart Semple’s Pinkest Pink and other liberated colours
 
Multidisciplinary artist Stuart Semple has made it his mission to make quality artist pigments that are available to everyone. He dislikes the proprietary way that Kapoor and others attempt to limit who can access certain artist pigments. Semple’s pigment PINK: The world’s pinkest pink (link opens in a new tab) was initially created as a reaction to Kapoor’s Vantablack. Semple’s Pinkest Pink can be used by everyone except Anish Kapoor. You can purchase this pigment by agreeing to the following:
 
*Note: By adding this product to your cart you confirm that you are not Anish Kapoor, you are in no way affiliated to[sic] Anish Kapoor, you are not purchasing this item on behalf of Anish Kapoor or an associate of Anish Kapoor. To the best of your knowledge, information and belief this paint will not make its way into that[sic] hands of Anish Kapoor.
 
However, Kapoor did get access to the Pinkest Pink pigment and posted a photograph online with his middle finger covered in the pink powdered pigment. The feud continued with Semple creating Black 2.0 and then Black 3.0 pigments which rival Vantablack as the “blackest black”, and more recently, he has created a range of pigments with sparkling, pearlescent or interference pigments which are freely available to purchase from his online store. He has also made a copy of International Klein Blue that he calls EASY KLEIN – IKB Incredibly Kleinish Blue (link opens in a new tab), and a copy of Tiffany Blue called Tiff Blue (link opens in a new tab).
 

 
Read this related article in The Collector online magazine (link opens in a new tab).
 

 

 
Figure 3.54. an example of vibrant pink powdered pigment (not Pinkest Pink) Image attribution: Pink pigments for decoration, manicure, makeup. Cosmetic, beauty products by Михаил Куница on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
 

 
MIT black and Musou black
 
In 2019, MIT produced a pigment that is even blacker than Vantablack, called MIT black (link opens in a new tab). It can absorb even more light than Vantablack – 99.995% – and is also more durable. It’s made from vertically aligned carbon nanotubes (CNTs), which are grown on aluminium.
 
Recently, another very black paint called Musou Black was developed in Japan. It absorbs 99.4% of light, making it the darkest black paint that is available on the market. This paint comes as a water-based acrylic, and anyone can purchase it online.
 
Watch this video to see what Musou black looks like in the real world (8 minutes):
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=299#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: I Painted My Entire Room With Musou Black—The World’s Blackest Paint, by The Action Lab on YouTube
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Chemistry and Physics of Special-Effect Pigments and Colorants for Inks and Coatings, Paint and Coatings Industry (link opens in a new tab) ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-050-problematic-colours.xhtml =====

Problematic colours

 

 

 
Some pigments and dyes have a problematic history due to how they were created and used, which was harmful to humans or animals, or because they contain toxic substances that poisoned people who were working with them, causing serious health problems and death.
 
The Library of Rare Colours
 
View this video to learn about a rare collection of pigments (including some problematic ones): the Forbes Pigment Collection (link opens in a new tab) at Harvard Art Museums in the USA (5 minutes)
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=2401#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: The library of rare colours by Tom Scott on YouTube
 
 
 
Problematic and dangerous colours
 
Read on to learn about some problematic pigments and their stories…
 

 
Mummy brown
 
Also called Mumia or Caput Mortuum (Latin meaning dead head), Mummy brown was a rich brown pigment made from grinding up real mummified humans and animals. Eventually, the supply of mummified bodies declined, and people began realising how the pigment was made and found it distasteful, so it was no longer produced or used. The modern artists’ pigment called Mummy brown is made from inorganic earthy substances.
 
Note: There is another colour known as Caput Mortuum Violet, which has a more purplish, mauve-brown colour, like dried blood. It was made from iron oxide and used by the Romans.
 
Read more about Mummy brown in this Harvard Museum article (link opens in a new tab)
 
Figure 3.55. Painting by Martin Drolling, 1815 showing use of Mummy brown pigment. Image attribution: Martin Drolling artist QS:P170,Q3295410, Martin Drolling – Interior of a Kitchen (detail) – WGA6679, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select image to enlarge.
 
 
 
 

 
Indian yellow
 
Indian yellow has a controversial history. It was claimed that the pigment was produced from the urine of cows that were fed only mango leaves, but this story was disputed by some sources. The story claims that cows were malnourished and sickly as a result of the diet and that this practice was outlawed in 1908 due to animal cruelty. Investigations into this story revealed no evidence to support it. However, more recent chemical analyses of pigment samples from the past, going back to 1400 CE, have shown that in some cases, the origin of this pigment was from cow’s urine, so historically, the pigment was produced this way. Today Indian yellow (Figure 3.56) is made by synthetically producing euxanthic acid – which is the main component.
 
Learn more about Indian yellow (link opens in a new tab)
 
Figure 3.56. Indian Yellow Pigment. Image attribution: Shisha-Tom, Indisch-Gelb, CC BY-SA 3.0. Select image to enlarge.
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Scheeler’s green and emerald green (also known as Paris green – Figure 3.57)
 
These pigments are very toxic due to the main ingredient, which is arsenic. This type of green paint and dye became popular as wallpaper and as a textile colour for women’s dresses and accessories in the Victorian era. It soon became clear that emerald green fabric and furnishings caused terrible health problems associated with arsenic poisoning, such as skin blisters and sores, nausea and vomiting, and death. Despite this, many still wore the colour, as it was so fashionable at the time.
 
Emerald green was also a popular artist-quality pigment used by Van Gogh, Cezanne and other Post-Impressionists around the late 1800s. After its toxic effects were discovered, the pigment was no longer used for making textiles and furnishings. However, it continued to be used as rat poison.
 
Learn more about dangerous fashion from this book: Matthews David, Alison. Fashion Victims: The Dangers of Dress Past and Present. London: Bloomsbury Publishing USA, 2017 (link opens in a new tab)
 
Figure 3.57. Old tin of Paris Green paint. Image attribution: Chris goulet at English Wikipedia, Paris Green (Schweinfurter Grün), CC BY-SA 3.0. Select image to enlarge.
 
 
 
 

 
White Lead (or lead white)
 
This was a common pigment made from lead carbonate, and its use dates back at least as far as 300 BCE. It was created using what was called “the Dutch method”, where lead was exposed to vinegar for long periods of time, which would corrode the lead and turn it white (the smell was supposed to be terrible). This white substance would then be scraped off and ground into a powder. It was highly toxic because of the lead content.
 
White lead (Figure 3.58) was popular as an artist’s oil paint due to its opacity and smooth texture. It was also used in cosmetics as a face paint or powder. Both uses were dangerous, causing health issues and death for those who had ongoing contact with the pigment. Perhaps because of its toxicity, it was used in the 18th century to paint wooden ship hulls and floors because it helped to prevent infestation by shipworm – a pest that would eat the ship’s timber. Lead white pigment is now banned in most countries, although an artist’s material known asFlake white or Cremnitz white does still exist and can be purchased in some formats. Some artists still prefer lead white to zinc white or titanium white because it’s more translucent, not as flat, and mixes well with other coloured pigments. A lead-free flake white is now also available that contains a mixture of other kinds of white pigments.
 
Figure 3.58. Old tin of Dutch Boy white lead paint. Image attribution: Thester11, LeadPaint1, CC BY 3.0. Select image to enlarge.
 
 
 
 

 
Vermilion/cinnabar
 
Also known as Sindoor, vermilion is a bright red pigment that is highly toxic because of its mercury content (mercury sulphide is its main element). Vermilion made from cinnabar was used across many cultures since prehistoric times in paintings and objects. It is well known as Chinese Red for the red lacquer paint applied to furniture and objects. It was a very popular artist’s pigment during the Middle Ages and Renaissance, although it was very expensive. It has also been used in cosmetics since ancient times, across Asia, Europe and the Middle East in products like lipstick and cheek rouge because of its vibrant red colour. Mining, working with, and wearing the pigment caused mercury poisoning.
 
As an artist’s pigment, it wasn’t very lightfast, so was prone to fading over time (see Figure 3.59). Today, it has been replaced by Cadmium red as a safer and more stable option.
 
Read this article on How Stuff Works (link opens in a new tab) to learn more about cinnabar toxicity.
 
Figure 3.59. Painting by Joshua Reynolds – the vermilion cloak has faded from a vibrant red to a pale pink over time. Image attribution: Joshua Reynolds artist QS:P170,Q194402, Charles Coote, 1st Earl of Bellamont, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select image to enlarge.
 
 
 
 

 
Cochineal
 
This is a scarlet-red dye or pigment made from cochineal beetles (Figure 3.60). While not toxic or unethically produced like the other pigments listed here (unless you are vegan), the failed attempt to create a cochineal industry in Australia in the late 1700s led to the imported prickly pear plant Opuntia running wild and becoming a restricted and prohibited weed (it was brought to Australia as a food source for the beetles).
 
Eventually, in the early 1900s, another insect, the cactoblastis moth, was brought to Australia as part of a prickly pear reduction program. These moth larvae were very successful in destroying the plant, which had an enormous impact on the land and enabled settlement of areas previously infested with prickly pear. It is still regarded as one of the most successful weed eradication programs using biological means instead of harmful chemicals. Learn more about the prickly pear story here (link opens in a new tab).
 
There is some controversy over the use of cochineal as a food colouring, which, if not specifically disclosed, is a problem for vegans, vegetarians, Muslims and other people who choose not to eat insect-based products.
 
Figure 3.60. Dried and Crushed Cochineal Insects. Image attribution: Dried and Crushed Cochineal Insects by raptorcaptor on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence). Select image to enlarge.
 
 
 
 

 
Indigo
 
Indigo is not a toxic dye, but indigo plantations have an unethical historical association with the African slave trade in North America and elsewhere around the world. Many people were forced to work in indigo plantations under terrible conditions with cruel mistreatment by plantation owners and managers. Other crops like cotton, tobacco, sugar and coffee have similar histories.
 
The development of synthetic indigo meant the end of indigo plantations. However, there is a return to more sustainable and environmentally friendly methods of dye production that don’t use petrochemicals. Natural indigo (Figure 3.61) may yet have a resurgence in popularity, although with more ethical and sustainable production processes.
 
Learn more about the history of indigo in this article: The Dark History of Indigo, Slavery’s Other Cash Crop (link opens in a new tab) by Jesslyn Shields, HowStuffWorks.com, Feb 7, 2020
 
Figure 3.61. Indigo plant (Indigofera tinctoria) Image attribution: Kurt Stüber, Indigofera tinctoria1, CC BY-SA 3.0. Select image to enlarge.
 
 
 
 

 
Luminous radium paint
 
Known as the Radium Girls, many girls and women in the early 20th century were poisoned by working with luminous paint that contained radium (which glowed in the dark), to create watch, clock and instrumentation dials (Figure 3.62). The women engaged in this factory work were encouraged to lick the tips of their brushes to create a fine point, thereby ingesting the radium, which caused terrible health conditions, including dental problems, fertility problems, necrosis of the jaw, anaemia and cancer.
 
Figure 3.62. Photograph of a factory scene from 1922, United States Radium Corporation showing women and girls using radium paint with no protection or warnings. Image attribution: Unknown author, All women or girls using radium paint with no protection or warnings in 1922, from- USRadiumGirls-Argonne1,ca1922-23-150dpi (cropped), marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons. Select image to enlarge.
 
 
 
 
Further reading
 
You can find more information about the topics on this page by reading Chromatopia: An Illustrated History of Color by David Coles (link opens in a new tab), or visiting this website: Pigments Through the Ages (link opens in a new tab).

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-051-interactive-colour-wheel.xhtml =====

Interactive colour wheel and colour relationships

 

 

 
Instructions for using this colour wheel (Figure 3.64)
 
Choose a colour scheme from the drop-down list and drag the circles around the colour wheel to create your own palette of colour relationships.
 
You can change the saturation or intensity of a hue by moving the circles closer to or further from the centre of the circle.
 
You can also change the shade of the colour with the sliders at the bottom of the wheel to create a darker value of the same hue.
 
Colours are shown as Hexadecimal values in this wheel. You can use these values in most image editing software applications.
 
Note: this interactive object is only partially keyboard accessible
 

 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=301 
 
 
Figure 3.64. Interactive colour wheel by Benjamin Knight. Media attribution: A Pen created on CodePen.io. Original URL: https://codepen.io/benknight/pen/MWmydp (link opens in a new tab), The MIT License (MIT) Copyright (c) 2022 Benjamin Knight
 
 
Colour relationships and schemes
 
The interactive colour wheel in Figure 3.64 has a selection of colour schemes that you can use to create harmonious and vibrant colour relationships and palettes.
 
Here are definitions of these schemes:
 

 

 
Monochrome
 
A monochromatic colour scheme contains a single colour hue with varying shades and tints, which are darker and lighter colours of the same hue (see Properties of colour in this resource for more about shades, tints and tones)
 
Figure 3.65. Colour wheel diagram showing monochrome colours. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page.
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 
Analogous
 
An analogous colour scheme contains one main hue (colour) with the colours on either side of it on the colour wheel. For a five-colour scheme, it may also contain the two adjacent colours on the colour wheel.
 
Colour Bias is also related to analogous colour. This term refers to the way that a colour may be biased towards another adjacent colour on the colour wheel – for example, you may have a red hue that has an orange colour bias or a purple colour bias and is not a pure “red” colour. In fact, many pigments we think of as primary or “pure” colours actually have a colour bias and are not pure spectrum colours.
 
Figure 3.66. Colour wheel diagram showing analogous colour hues. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page.
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Complementary
 
A complementary colour scheme contains the two colour hues directly opposite each other on the colour wheel.
 
Figure 3.67. Colour wheel diagram showing complementary colour hues. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page.
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Split-complementary
 
A split-complementary scheme includes one dominant colour hue and two hues on either side of the dominant colour’s complementary hue.
 
Figure 3.68. Colour wheel diagram showing split-complementary colour hues. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page.
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Triadic
 
A triadic colour scheme has three colour hues that are equally spaced around the colour wheel, forming a triangle shape.
 
Figure 3.69. Colour wheel diagram showing triadic colour hues. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page.
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Tetradic
 
A tetradic colour scheme has four hues that form a rectangle within the colour wheel. There is also a quadratic scheme where the four hues form a square that is more evenly spaced than the tetradic rectangle, which could be any rectangular shape.
 
Figure 3.70. Colour wheel diagram showing tetradic colour hues. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page.
 
 
 
 
 
 
See Colour trends and palettes in this resource for a selection of colour palette generators.
 
 
 
The Dimensions of Colour Today: ICD 2022 (David Briggs)
 
This video is a recording of a talk by David Briggs, who is an Australian authority on colour theory. He bases the talk on content from his website The Dimensions of Colour (link opens in a new tab), highlighting some developments in how we understand colour and colour relationships. He gives an overview of the alternative frameworks available today for visualising colour relationships. It is an academic video, but the imagery and diagrams make these complex concepts easier to understand. The YouTube page also contains links to all the resources and tools he references in the video. (34 minutes)
 
 
 
 
One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here: https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=301#oembed-1 
 
 
Media attribution: ICD 2022: The Dimensions of Colour Today (David Briggs), Colour Society of Australia NSW Division on YouTube
 
Image attributions for this page: Colour wheel images on this page adapted from Color Wheel Theory by Marin Bulat on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence).

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-052-the-properties-of-colour.xhtml =====

Properties of colour

 

 

 
This page contains definitions of the basic properties of colour, which is useful to understand if you are working with colour applications and developing colour relationships or palettes.
 

 
Hue
 
Hue is the term that we use to classify colour. For example, if we describe something as “red”, or “magenta”, or “greenish-yellow”, that is the hue. In physics, a specific wavelength of light is a hue. Black, white and grey are not hues, although we may call them colours in a practical sense – for example, when referring to coloured paints or fabrics.
 
Figure 3.71. Hue colour wheel. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Saturation / Chroma
 
Saturation is the intensity of the colour. Saturated colours appear very vibrant, whereas de-saturated colours tend towards grey. A black-and-white image would have zero colour saturation. Saturation does not relate to how light or dark a colour is. Saturation is similar to Chroma, and some people use the two terms to mean the same thing. However, according to the CIE Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage (link opens in a new tab), they have different definitions.
 
The difference between Saturation and Chroma is subtle. It relates to how colours of light reach our eyes from the various parts of an object and the colour we see as belonging to the object itself.
 
Saturation is the relative colourfulness of light reflected from an object, independent of its brightness, and is our perception of its colourfulness, as detected by our eyes.
 
Chroma is the absolute colour of the object irrespective of its relative appearance – it’s the attributes we see as belonging to the object itself. “For an object to have high chroma it must reflect/ transmit saturated light in relatively large amounts.”[1]
 
Figure 3.72. Saturation colour wheel. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Value
 
Value is the lightness or darkness of a colour – meaning its closeness to white or black. For example, dark green reflects less light and therefore has a lower value than pale green. Value helps us to identify objects as three-dimensional – light and shadow on objects show us more than a flat 2-dimensional image. Our brains are constantly evaluating objects around us and their colour value to determine their position in 3-dimensional space.
 
Figure 3.73. Value colour wheel. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Tint
 
A tint is a hue with white added. The value of a tint is approaching white. Mixing a hue with white lowers its purity or Chroma.
 
Figure 3.74. Tints colour wheel Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Shade
 
A shade is a hue with black added. The value of a tint is approaching black. Mixing a hue with black lowers its purity or Chroma.
 
Figure 3.75. Shades colour wheel. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Tone
 
A tone is a hue with grey added. The saturation of a tone is less than the full saturation of its hue. Mixing a hue with grey lowers its purity or Chroma.
 
Figure 3.76. Tones colour wheel. Image attribution: see attribution at the bottom of this page
 
 
 
 
 
 
Image attribution for this page: adapted from Adobe Stock images, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence):
 

Color Theory Tints, Tones and Shades Vector Chart Illustration with Color Wheels by csiling
 
 

Color Theory HSV or Hue, Saturation, Value (Brightness) Illustration Chart by csiling
 
 
 
 

"Briggs, D. The Difference Between Chroma and Saturation", Munsell Color, https://munsell.com/color-blog/difference-chroma-saturation/, accessed 03/01/2023 ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-053-colour-properties-tints-shades-and-tones-learning-activity.xhtml =====

Colour properties: tints, shades and tones - learning activity

 

 

 
This interactive learning activity is a simple drag-and-drop exercise that covers what you have learned in this chapter.
 
Drag the colour swatches onto the boxes in the correct order for tints, shades and tones, and check to see if your guesses are correct.
 
 
An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:

 https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=1708#h5p-1

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-054-colour-properties-light-to-dark-learning-activity.xhtml =====

Colour properties: light to dark - learning activity

 

 

 
This interactive learning activity is a simple drag-and-drop exercise that covers what you have learned in this chapter.
 
Drag the colour swatches onto the boxes in the correct order and check to see if your guess is correct.
 
 
An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:

 https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=1710#h5p-2

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-055-colour-properties-monochrome-greyscale-learning-activity.xhtml =====

Colour properties: monochrome (greyscale) - learning activity

 

 

 
This interactive learning activity is a simple drag-and-drop exercise that covers what you have learned in this chapter.
 
Drag the colour swatches onto the boxes in the correct order for greyscale from light to dark, and check to see if your guess is correct.
 
 
An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:

 https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=1721#h5p-4

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-056-colour-relationships-bias-colour-scale-learning-activity.xhtml =====

Colour relationships: bias colour scale - learning activity

 

 

 
This interactive learning activity is a simple drag-and-drop exercise that covers what you have learned in this chapter.
 
Drag the colour swatches onto the boxes in the correct order for the colour bias scale from teal to yellow-green, and check to see if your guess is correct.
 
 
An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:

 https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1/?p=1719#h5p-3

===== FILE: EPUB/chapter-057-colour-charts.xhtml =====

Colour charts - Pantone and Munsell systems

 

 

 
The colour systems currently used in creative and design industries for selecting and matching colours with a high degree of accuracy are produced by Pantone and Munsell.
 
Pantone colour is a dual system that displays charts or “guides” of proprietary colours that are described with different information, such as CMYK values and Pantone spot colour identifying codes.
 
The Munsell colour system is different to Pantone – it is a way of classifying visible colours with a number system. A colour could be classified in both the Munsell system and in a Pantone colour guide.
 
This resource cannot display more than a few selected images, as both of these systems are under the copyright of their companies. Their websites and related links provided on this page, however, do have detailed information about how these systems work, and how you can use them in your creative practice.
 

Pantone colour
 

The image in Figure 3.77 displays a sample taken from a Pantone colour guide. The whole digital chart would be too large to display here. You can find more complete examples on the Pantone website (link opens in a new tab).
 
This online resource also has a web version of the Pantone PSM colour chart (link opens in a new tab). Keep in mind that any digital Pantone chart will not necessarily show the exact colour you will see when printed. The reason hard-copy swatch books are used in the design industry is that they show the exact physical colour of a Pantone pigment. It is also advised that swatch books are updated regularly, as some pigments may fade or change over time and not show accurate colours.
 

 
Figure 3.77. Photographic image of two Pantone colour guides. Image attribution: Pantone color palette by art_rich on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
 
 
 
 

Munsell colour system
 

The image in Figure 3.78 is a sample of the twenty basic hues in the Munsell colour system. Each of these hues has a colour chart showing the different value (lightness or darkness), chroma (saturation or brilliance) and relationships between the colours. Learn more about the Munsell colour system from the Munsell Color website (link opens in a new tab)
 
Andrew Werth has created a Virtual Munsell Colour Wheel (link opens in a new tab) that allows you to browse Munsell colour notations – a useful tool for designers. Each colour in this tool has the Munsell colour notation, plus RGB and Hex values.
 

 
Figure 3.78. Twenty hues of the Munsell colour system at maximum chroma in the sRGB gamut. Image attribution: Thenoizz, MunsellColorWheel, CC BY 3.0

===== FILE: EPUB/copyright.xhtml =====

Colour Theory: Understanding and Working with Colour by RMIT University is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

===== FILE: EPUB/front-matter-001-introduction-what-is-colour-theory.xhtml =====

1

 
Colour theory: understanding and working with colour

 
An open educational resource for learning about colour and it's applications

 

 

 
What is colour theory?
 
Colour theory covers a long history from antiquity to modern times. It includes academic and scientific investigations into how we see and understand colour. It also includes practical applications for using colour in creative work.
 
This learning resource explains the history of colour theory, how we see colour, and how to use colour systems to mix colour and create colour relationships.
 
Also included are quizzes and learning activities to guide users in applications of colour theory for art and design. This content is relevant for anyone working with colour in creative and scientific fields.
 

 
Image attribution: Colour wheel by piai on Adobe Stock licenced to RMIT University (Education Licence)

===== FILE: EPUB/front-matter-002-acknowledgement-of-country.xhtml =====

2

 
Acknowledgement of country

 

 

 
In Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander culture it is respectful to formally womin djeka (welcome) people to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander country or land. At RMIT we do this with the following acknowledgement:
 Image attribution:

 ‘Luwaytini’ by Mark Cleaver, Palawa. 

 
 
“We would like to acknowledge Wurundjeri people of the Kulin Nations as the Traditional Owners of the land on which the University stands. We respectfully recognise Elders past and present.”
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
At RMIT we recognise and respect the unique culture and contribution that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people bring to our communities. We are also proud to provide study, cultural, & personal support to our Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander students in their learning journey. We womin djeka you to further explore and experience more about Australian Indigenous culture by visiting our Indigenous education centre – Ngarara Willim Centre and interacting with our Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff and students.

===== FILE: EPUB/front-matter-003-about-this-book.xhtml =====

3

 
About this book

 

 

 
Disclaimer
 
RMIT Library staff have compiled this textbook in good faith, exercising all due care and attention.
 
No representation is made about the accuracy, completeness or suitability of the information in this publication for any particular purpose. The publisher assumes no responsibility for any damage or injury to persons or property arising out of the use of any materials, instructions, methods or ideas contained in the book. Readers should seek appropriate advice when applying the information to their specific needs.
 
Attributions 
 
This textbook includes material adapted or reused from third party works under Creative Commons licences. In the case of multiple downstream adaptations, links to original works are included within the attribution statement where possible.
 
Suggested citation
 
Cianci, L. (2023) Colour Theory: Understanding and Working with Colour. RMIT Open Press <https://rmit.pressbooks.pub/colourtheory1>
 
Reviewers
 
Riley Barber
 
Suggested attribution
 
“Colour Theory: Understanding and Working with Colour” by Dr Lisa Cianci, RMIT University Library, licensed under CC BY-NC 4.0
 
Copyright
 
This book is provided under an Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International licence except where otherwise noted.

 The RMIT University Logo and cover design are ‘all rights reserved’.
 
We have made all reasonable efforts to:

 • clearly label material where the copyright is owned by a third party

 • ensure that the copyright owner has consented to this material being presented in this textbook.
 
External links
 
This textbook includes links to third-party websites that contain copyright protected material, your access to the sites will be covered by terms between you and the other operator/owner of the site. We are not responsible for any of the content, including links found on the site. Read and abide by the external websites’ terms of use.
 
Published by
 
RMIT Open Press.
 
Credits
 
This open educational resource was created by staff of RMIT University Library, Digital Learning.
 
Cover design
 
By Dr. Lisa Cianci

 Cover artwork image by Lisa Cianci, adapted and remixed from two Adobe Stock images:
 
Anatomy – human eye detail, isolated on white  by acrogame on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
Abstract color background spectrum lines  by kurkalukas on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence)

===== FILE: EPUB/front-matter-004-introduction-what-is-colour.xhtml =====

4

 
Introduction: what is colour?

 

 

 
Colour is how we describe the visible features of an object by its hue, lightness, and saturation. In physics, we identify colour by measuring a range of wavelengths known as the visible spectrum (See Figure 0.1). We also call this light or electromagnetic radiation. The human eye perceives these visible wavelengths as different colours.
 

The visible light spectrum measured by nanometres (nm).
 

 
Figure 0.1. The visible light spectrum. Image attribution: Vector diagram with the visible light spectrum. Visible light, infrared, and ultraviolet by petrroudny on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
 
 
In this open educational resource, you can find information on colour theory divided into three chapters. This resource also includes quizzes to test your knowledge, and practical learning activities to guide users in applications of colour theory for art and design. The content is relevant for anyone working with colour in creative and scientific fields.
 
Each chapter covers information on the following topics:
 

Chapter 1. Colour theory: history and culture
 

An introduction to colour theory history with a summary of selected key scientific developments. Also covered are short introductions to cultural interpretations of colour and colour aesthetics.
 
Scientific discoveries relating to colour
 
Cultural interpretations of colour and colour symbolism
 
Colour aesthetics in art and design
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 2. Colour theory: the visible spectrum
 

A scientific approach to the visible spectrum and how humans and other species perceive colour.
 
Introduction to current scientific theory of the visible spectrum, physics, optics and chemistry
 
Anatomy of the human eye: how we see and interpret colour information in the brain
 
Colour blindness and other vision differences
 
Colour vision in animals
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 3. Colour theory: working with colour
 

Detailed explanations of different colour systems for the practical applications of colour in physical materials and digital media.
 
Understanding additive and subtractive colour
 
Understanding colour systems for working with: 
digital media,
 
printing, and
 
colour pigments and dyes
 
 
Using colour wheels and creating colour relationships
 
 
 
 
 

Glossary of Terms
 

A list of all the glossary terms used throughout this resource.  You can view all glossary term definitions on a single page at the end of the resource, or select individual terms throughout the text as you are reading.

===== FILE: EPUB/part-001-slug-1-colour-theory-history-and-culture.xhtml =====

1. Colour theory: history and culture

 

 

 

 
Figure 1.1. Boutet 1708 colour circles. Image attribution: C. B. (probably Claude Boutet or its editor, Christophe Ballard), Boutet 1708 color circles, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons.
 
Scientific and theoretical investigations into colour go back thousands of years. Some of the earliest recorded theories of colour come from the ancient Greek civilisation. You will find these in the writings of philosophers such as Democritus, Plato and Aristotle.
 
Other notable theories of colour developed through the centuries in the work of significant scholars, scientists and artists such as: al-Kindi; Leonardo da Vinci; Robert Fludd; Isaac Newton; Johann Wolfgang von Goethe; and many more.
 
This chapter will introduce colour theory history with a summary of selected key scientific developments. Also included are short introductions to cultural interpretations of colour and colour aesthetics.
 
Each section of this chapter will cover the following topics:
 

1.1 History of colour theories
 

Antiquity (c. 500 BCE to 300 CE)
 
Middle Ages and Renaissance (c. 400 to 1600 CE)
 
The Enlightenment (c. 1650 to 1800)
 
Modern era (c. 1850 to 1980)
 
Contemporary Colour Systems (c. 1930 – 2020+)
 
History of colour theory: references and resources
 
 
 
1.2 Colour theory: cultural interpretations 

Colour psychology and physiology
 
Colour symbolism in different cultures
 
Colour and language
 
Colour theory in culture – resources
 
 
 
1.3 Colour aesthetics 

Colour aesthetics in art and design
 
Colour grading in photography and film
 
Colour trends and palettes
 
 
 
 
 
Note: this chapter does not contain a complete listing of all scholars, scientists and artists that have contributed to scientific and artistic fields related to colour theory, rather, it is a condensed timeline with selected notable mentions. See subject guides and references for more information on these topics.

===== FILE: EPUB/part-002-history-of-colour-theories.xhtml =====

1.1 History of colour theories

 

 

 

 
Figure 1.2. Engraving of Sir Isaac Newton. Image attribution: Sir Isaac Newton, date: 1680s by Archivist on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence). Select image to enlarge.
 
How do we know so much about what colour is? How do we see it and how can we use it?
 
A progression in our understanding of colour through many versions of practical colour systems, has developed over thousands of years of recorded history. Different ways of identifying and classifying colours have been theorised since ancient times. More recently, scientifically accurate means of measuring the visible light spectrum have been developed.
 
Today, many of us are still taught as children that red, yellow and blue are primary colours, and we learn to mix paints and crayons using this principle from a very early age. While this traditional colour system credited to Sir Isaac Newton (see Figure 1.2) is good for some practical colour mixing methods, it isn’t scientifically accurate, based on what we now know about light and colour. It’s useful to learn how colour theory has developed over time, beyond mixing paint pigments, if you are working with colour in any field, whether creative or scientific.
 
This part of Chapter 1 contains a brief history of colour theories from a selection of philosophers, scholars, scientists and artists who have made significant contributions to this field.
 
 
 

Timeline of discoveries:
 

Antiquity (c. 500 BCE to 300 CE)
 
 
 

Middle Ages and Renaissance (c. 400 to 1600 CE)
 
 
 

The Enlightenment (c. 1650 to 1800)
 
 
 

Modern era (c. 1850 to 1980)
 
 
 

Contemporary Colour Systems (c. 1930 – 2020+)

===== FILE: EPUB/part-003-cultural-interpretations.xhtml =====

1.2 Colour theory: cultural interpretations

 

 

 
Introduction
 

 
Figure 1.19. Coloured powders used in the Indian Holi festival. Image attribution: Coloured powders used in the Indian Holi festival of colour. Image attribution: Color powder for Holi festival, Hindu tradition by Ruslan Gilmanshin on Adobe Stock licenced to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
Scientific theories of colour cross geographic borders and are described as ‘universal’, but meanings and symbolism attached to colour can be very specific to different cultural groups around the world, such as the Indian Holi festival of colour[1] (Figure 1.19), and at different times throughout human history.
 
Despite these culturally specific meanings and symbolism, studies investigating emotional links to colour have found some links to be shared around the world.
 
If you are an artist or designer of products, packaging, fashion, interior/exterior environments, digital media, games, etc., understanding how colour can affect your audience is useful.
 

Topics covered
 

This chapter will include a brief introduction to cultural interpretations of colour and where colour has been linked to human emotion, psychology and physiology.
 
Colour psychology and physiology
 
Colour symbolism in different cultures
 
Colour and language
 
 
 
 
 

 

Kidangur A. 2020, “What is Holi?”, Time Magazine, March 9 2020, accessed 02/02/2023 <https://time.com/5799354/what-is-holi/> ↵

===== FILE: EPUB/part-004-slug-1-3-colour-theory-colour-aesthetics.xhtml =====

1.3 Colour aesthetics

 

 

 
Introduction
 

 
Colour aesthetics can be simply described as how colour affects people. It’s a mixture of the scientific, cultural and psychological aspects of colour theory.
 
Colour aesthetics explores how certain colours, or combinations of colours, are perceived by humans and how we react to them. What colours do we find attractive or ugly? Why do some colours look pleasing together and others clash? How does colour enhance our surroundings and living spaces?
 
It’s useful to research and learn about colour aesthetics and selected artists and designers that played a significant role in this field over the last 100 years. This can help you to develop your own creative practice, and your personal approach to working with colour.
 

Figure 1.36. Bauhaus fabric samples by Otti Berger. Image attribution: Otti Berger artist QS:P170,Q2037742 Creator:Bauhaus, Book MET DP368775, CC0 1.0. Select image to enlarge.
 
 
 
 

This section covers the following topics:
 

Colour aesthetics in art and design:

 how colour aesthetics influenced the creative practices of some of the key figures in 20th century art and design and its relevance today
 
Colour grading in photography and film: an introduction to colour grading and correction in photography and film – why it is used and cultural implications of standard colour-tests
 
Contemporary colour trends and palettes used in design

===== FILE: EPUB/part-005-slug-2-colour-theory-the-visible-spectrum.xhtml =====

2. Colour theory: the visible spectrum

 

 

 
As stated in Chapter 1, section 1.1, Sir Isaac Newton was the first to classify the visible spectrum as we know it today.
 

This diagram shows the visible light spectrum and other types of non-visible electromagnetic radiation measured in nanometres (nm).
 

 
Figure 2.1. Image attribution:  Visible light spectrum. Color waves length perceived by human eye… by MicroOne on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
 
 
The colours we see are based on wavelengths, and as Figure 2.1 shows, there are wavelengths that the human eye cannot see, like radio waves, X-rays, and microwaves.  In the visible spectrum, violet rays, which are the shortest wavelengths are also the highest in energy. Red light wavelengths are the longest and the lowest in energy.
 
This chapter will focus on the visible spectrum, and the science-related aspects of colour vision. Each section will include information, links, resources, and learning activities to further develop your knowledge.
 
Learn about the topics listed here:
 

2.1 The physics of light and colour
 

Light: electromagnetic radiation
 
Optics 1: lenses and ocular devices
 
Optics 2: electronic technologies and spectral analysis
 
Why are things different colours?
 
 
 

2.2 Colour in chemistry
 

Spectrophotometry and colorimetry
 
Metamerism – colour perception and matching
 
Luminescence
 
Colour chemistry 1: animals that can change colour
 
Colour chemistry 2: photography and chromatography
 
Colour chemistry 3: universal indicator and diagnostic tests
 
Colour chemistry 4: fireworks
 
 
 

2.3 The eye – how we see colour
 

Anatomy of the human eye
 
How the brain interprets colour information
 
Colour blindness
 
Vision difference: tetrachromacy and synesthesia
 
Accessible colour
 
How animals see colour

===== FILE: EPUB/part-006-slug-2-1-the-physics-of-colour.xhtml =====

2.1 The physics of light and colour

 

 

 

 
Figure 2.2 Quantum wave design. Image attribution: Quantum Wave by agsandrew on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Physics is the science that deals with energy and matter. To understand what colour is and how we see it, we need to explore the physical properties of light as a form of energy and how it interacts with matter – the objects we see.
 
This section explains the following physics-related topics in an introductory way with videos, links, and learning activities to help you to extend your knowledge of the physics of light and colour.
 

Topics covered:
 

Light: electromagnetic radiation

 Learn about the weird science of light – is it a wave or a particle?
 
Optics 1: lenses and ocular devices

 Lenses, camera obscura, camera lucida, kaleidoscopes and 3D glasses
 
Optics 2: electronic technologies and spectral analysis

 Lasers, optical fibre, photovoltaic cells, and spectral analysis in astronomy
 
Why are things different colours?

 How light is absorbed or reflected by objects

===== FILE: EPUB/part-007-slug-2-2-colour-chemistry.xhtml =====

2.2 Colour in chemistry

 

 

 

 
Figure 2.21. Periodic table of elements. Image attribution: Periodic table of elements by R4Design.pro. Select image to enlarge.
 
The science of chemistry deals with chemical elements – which are the substances of matter (Figure 2.21). Chemistry also deals with the properties and behaviours of these substances when mixed and the development of methods to create new substances.
 
The relationship between chemistry and colour is complex. Chemical processes are used to create colours that we use every day, and colour is used in chemistry to measure and analyse substances and chemical processes. It’s useful to learn about this aspect of colour theory if you’re working with colour materials in creative and scientific fields.
 
This section covers selected topics that explain the relationship between colour and chemistry (you can also find additional information in section 3.4 Colour systems: paint pigments and dyes).
 

Topics
 

Spectrophotometry and colorimetry

 The science of measuring colour in chemical solutions
 
Metamerism – colour perception and matching

 How our perception of colours can change in different lighting conditions and how to avoid colour mismatching
 
Luminescence

 Different ways chemical substances can emit coloured light
 
Colour chemistry 1: animals that can change colour
 
Colour chemistry 2: photography and chromatography
 
Colour chemistry 3: universal indicator and diagnostic tests
 
Colour chemistry 4: fireworks

===== FILE: EPUB/part-008-slug-2-3-the-human-eye-how-we-see-colour.xhtml =====

2.3 The eye - how we see colour

 

 

 

 
Understanding how we see colour is fundamental to understanding colour theory. The human eye has evolved to detect lightwaves from a limited bandwidth, as previously discussed in this resource – this is the visible spectrum. But how exactly do our eyes detect light and distinguish between different light wavelengths?
 
This section explains how we see and how our brains interpret visual information.
 
 
 

Topics covered
 

Anatomy of the human eye

 How light enters the eye and is captured as information
 
How the brain interprets colour information

 How the brain makes sense of visual information, and some weird things that our brains do with that information
 
Colour blindness

 Why some people see less colours, and different types of colour blindness
 
Vision difference: tetrachromacy and synesthesia

 How some people have different vision experiences
 
Accessible colour

 How we can use colour to create content that is accessible for all sighted people.
 
How animals see colour

 Weird and wonderful light and colour detection in the animal kingdom
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.42 Image by Lisa Cianci, adapted and remixed from two images attributed here:
 
Anatomy human eye detail isolated on white by acrogame on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
Abstract color background spectrum lines by kurkalukas on Adobe Stock licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence)

===== FILE: EPUB/part-009-colour-theory-working-with-colour.xhtml =====

3. Colour theory: working with colour

 

 

 

 
Figure 3.1. Colour Wheel. Image adapted from True precision step graduated color wheel for art theory by Igor on Adobe Stock licenced to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
Introduction
 
Colour is used in so many aspects of our lives – in the objects and environments that we see all around us every day, our clothes, homes, art and design creations, and digital media like photography, videos, games and websites.
 
This chapter explains the colour systems used in mixing and creating colour in both digital media, such as images, videos, websites, and physical materials, such as printing, paint pigments, and dyes.
 
Learn about the following topics in these five sections. Each section also includes links, resources and learning activities to further develop your knowledge.
 
3.1 Additive and subtractive colour 

Understanding the difference between additive and subtractive colour can help you when working with different kinds of materials and digital media
 
Additive and subtractive colour
 
Additive and subtractive colours on the colour wheel
 
How additive and subtractive colour works when printing a digital image
 
Practical activities: mixing additive and subtractive colours
 
Test yourself: is it additive or subtractive colour?
 
 
 
3.2 Colour systems: digital 

How colour systems such as RGB, Hexadecimal, and others work with our digital media and software applications
 
Colour spaces or gamuts
 
How digital screens display colour
 
What is Hexadecimal colour?
 
Other RGB colour models
 
How do digital images and videos display colour?
 
 
 
3.3 Colour systems: printing 

How different colours are produced for the printing process including Process (CMYK+) and Spot (Pantone) colour
 
Do I need to convert an RGB image to CMYK to print it?
 
Process (CMYK+) and Spot (Pantone) colour printing
 
Colour management – what can go wrong?
 
 
 
3.4 Colour systems: pigments and dyes 

The history and development of colour materials and how they are used in creative practice
 
Colour pigments: history and usage
 
Mixing paint pigments
 
Colour dyes: a (very) short history of dyes from around the world
 
Colour dyes: methods and processes
 
Colour dyes: synthetic colours and sustainability
 
Special colours, controversial colours and interesting facts
 
Problematic colours
 
 
 
3.5 Colour wheels and relationships 

An interactive colour wheel and information about colour relationships, schemes, properties and colour systems used in creative industries
 
Interactive colour wheel and colour relationships
 
The properties of colour
 
Colour properties learning activities: 
tints, shades and tones
 
light to dark
 
monochrome(greyscale)
 
bias colour
 
 
Colour charts – Pantone and Munsell systems

===== FILE: EPUB/part-010-additive-and-subtractive-colour.xhtml =====

3.1 Additive and subtractive colour

 

 

 
What is additive and subtractive colour?
 
Additive and subtractive colour systems are ways of describing colour primaries and how to mix colours.
 

A simple way to remember the difference between additive and subtractive colour is:
 
Additive colour is created by mixing light
 
Subtractive colour is created by mixing materials
 
 
 
 

 
Figure 3.2. Additive and subtractive colour primaries. Image attribution:Additive and Subtractive colour primaries by Lisa Cianci, Creative Commons licence Attribution-Non-commercial-ShareAlike-4.0
 
Read on to find out what additive and subtractive colour is, the primary colours for each system (Figure 3.2), and how these systems are used to mix colours with light and materials.
 

Topics covered:
 

Additive and subtractive colour systems
 
Additive and subtractive colours on the colour wheel
 
How additive and subtractive colour works when printing a digital image
 
Practical activities: mixing additive and subtractive colours
 
Test yourself: is it additive colour or subtractive colour?

===== FILE: EPUB/part-011-slug-3-2-colour-systems-digital.xhtml =====

3.2 Colour systems: digital

 

 

 

 
Figure 3.19. Digital colour image. Image attribution: Futuristic Digital Light Technology by A Luna Blue on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Introduction
 
Digital colour systems are used by visual creation tools, such as apps for image editing and illustration, digital photography and video, interactive objects like games and websites, online media, 3D, and extended reality environments (XR) (including Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality).
 
These colour systems and their terminology have become industry standards and part of the knowledge base required for any digital media creator. This section explains some of the technical terms commonly used and how these systems work.
 

Topics covered:
 

Colour gamuts and spaces
 
How digital screens display colour
 
What is Hexadecimal colour?
 
Other RGB colour systems
 
How do digital images and videos display colour?

===== FILE: EPUB/part-012-slug-3-3-colour-systems-printing.xhtml =====

3.3 Colour systems: printing

 

 

 

 
Figure 3.27 Printing machine with CMYK colour. Image attribution: Printing machine by adimas on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education licence)
 
Colour printing requires a range of different methods for printing all kinds of imagery onto different kinds of materials. This includes photographic imagery, artwork, publications, and graphic, industrial, fashion, and textile design products.
 
Understanding how subtractive colour systems work, how inks, pigments and materials behave in printing processes, and how to achieve effects like metallic and fluorescent colours or gloss and embossed finishes requires special skill and expertise.
 
This section is a short introduction to how colour works in printing – from digital media to a physical product.
 

Topics covered:
 

Do I need to convert an RGB image to CMYK to print it?
 
Process (CMYK) and Spot (Pantone) colour printing
 
Colour management – what can go wrong?

===== FILE: EPUB/part-013-slug-3-4-colour-systems-paint-pigments-and-dyes.xhtml =====

3.4 Colour systems: pigments and dyes

 

 

 

 
Figure 3.31 artist’s watercolour palette. Used large watercolor palette on old wooden table – top view by Greg Brave on Adobe Stock, licensed to RMIT University (Education Licence)
 
The development, mixing and use of pigments and dyes throughout history, across all cultures, is an important part of understanding colour theory. From early human use of natural pigments made from ochres in the earth to synthetic colours developed in science labs, there are many interesting stories behind the colours we know and use today.
 
This section has information about where pigments and dyes come from, how they were developed, and how you can use them in your creative practice.
 

What’s the difference between a pigment and a dye? 
 
Pigments and dyes are the main types of colour materials (colourants) we use in art and design, and also in science and industry. A simple way to identify whether a colour material is a pigment or a dye is whether it is soluble or not:
 
pigments are insoluble colourants – which means they can’t be dissolved in water and are usually held together in some kind of “binder”, which could be a liquid medium like oil, acrylic emulsion, or gum arabic, or formed into solid materials like pastels or pencils.
 
dyes are soluble colourants – which means they can be dissolved in water. This is usually because the particles of a dye are much smaller than a pigment. A dye will chemically bond with the material it is absorbed into – like dyeing hair or fabric, and usually requires some kind of fixative called a “mordant” to help bind the dye to the material.
 
 
Pigments tend to sit on top of the materials they colour – like paint on a canvas. Some traditional painting methods also included Tempera – which used egg yolk as the medium for ground pigments – or fresco painting, where pigments were mixed with water and applied to wet plaster.
 
Many pigments are made from inorganic substances like rocks and minerals, whereas many dyes are made from organic substances like plants or insects, but there are exceptions to this rule. Most artists’ paints are made from pigments, but inks can be made from either pigments or dyes. Inks can have different binders like shellac, acrylic emulsion or gum arabic.
 
Pigments usually hold their colour (colourfastness) better than dyes and don’t fade as quickly in ultraviolet or visible sunlight (lightfastness). Have you ever had a carpet or curtains that partially faded in the areas that were exposed to the sun every day? Ultraviolet light can break the chemical bonds in coloured materials, which leads to fading over time. Some pigments are more lightfast than others. Some pigment and dye colours are called fugitive because they fade quickly – like the organic pigment madder lake.
 
The lightfastness of coloured pigments was an area of experimentation for artists as early as the Renaissance, who noticed that certain pigment colours they were using in their paintings changed over time. Some colours faded from sunlight or got darker due to changes in the pigment structure. Some artists compensated for how colours would change over time by painting with very bright colours that they knew would fade or darken over time.
 
The image in Figure 3.32 shows how pigments can fade over time. The pigment used for the Prince’s coat in this painting was originally bright red. It has faded due to light exposure for over 260 years. The other colours used remain closer to their original vibrance.
 

 
Figure 3.32.  Portrait of George, Prince of Wales, later George III by Liotard. Image attribution: Jean-Étienne Liotard artist QS:P170,Q123757, George, Prince of Wales, later George III, 1754 by Liotard, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Modern artists’ paints today are generally more lightfast than early artists’ pigments, thanks to research and experimentation by paint makers, but not many would be completely lightfast. That is why you might see valuable artworks in galleries and museums kept under special lighting conditions to minimise fading.
 
Read the following sections of this chapter to learn about the history and practical applications of paint pigments and dyes.
 

This section covers the following topics:
 

Colour pigments: history and usage 
 
Mixing paint pigments
 
Colour dyes: a (very) short history of dyes from around the world 
 
Colour dyes: methods and processes
 
Colour dyes: synthetic colours and sustainability
 
Special colours, controversial colours and interesting facts
 
Problematic colours

===== FILE: EPUB/part-014-slug-3-5-colour-wheels-and-relationships.xhtml =====

3.5 Colour wheels and relationships

 

 

 

 
Figure 3.63 Harris’ RYB Colour Wheel. Image attribution: Moses Harris, The Natural System of Colours and Ignaz Schiffermüller, Versuch eines Farbensystems (Vienna, 1772), plate I, Moses Harris, The Natural System of Colours, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons
 
Colour wheels (Figure 3.63) have been used for hundreds of years as a method of working with colour – to understand mixing colour, creating colour palettes and relationships, and selecting colour in software applications.
 
Many early colour wheels used the RYB (Red, Yellow, Blue) primaries alongside secondary and tertiary colours in a wheel, but today, with digital technologies influencing how we create works that use colour, it is accepted that the additive colour primaries (RGB) (or CMY for subtractive colour) are the standard used in software applications as screen-based media work with additive colour (pixels are made of light).
 

Topics covered:
 

Interactive colour wheel and colour relationships:

 An interactive colour wheel created using HTML, CSS and JavaScript, which you can manipulate to create your own colour schemes and palettes with definitions and examples of colour relationships, such as analogous, complimentary, split-complimentary, monochrome, tetradic, and triadic. 
 
The properties of colour

 Definitions and interactive examples of colour properties such as hue, chroma, saturation, value, tints, shades, and tones.
 
Colour properties learning activities: 
tints, shades and tones
 
light to dark
 
monochrome (greyscale)
 
bias colour.
 
 
Colour charts – Pantone and Munsell systems

 Information about colour charts and systems used in industry.

===== FILE: EPUB/table-of-contents.xhtml =====

Contents

 
 

 
 Colour theory: understanding and working with colour
 An open educational resource for learning about colour and it's applications
 
 

 

 
 Acknowledgement of country
 
 

 

 
 About this book
 
 

 

 
 Introduction: what is colour?
 
 

 

 
 1. Colour theory: history and culture
 

 

 
 1.1 History of colour theories
 

 

 
 Antiquity (c. 500 BCE to 300 CE)
 
 

 

 
 Middle Ages and Renaissance (c. 400 to 1600 CE)
 
 

 

 
 The Enlightenment (c. 1650 to 1800)
 
 

 

 
 Modern era (c. 1850 to 1980)
 
 

 

 
 Contemporary Colour Systems (c. 1930 – 2020+)
 
 

 

 
 History of colour theory: references and resources
 
 

 

 
 1.2 Colour theory: cultural interpretations
 

 

 
 Colour psychology and physiology
 Colour Theory: History and Culture
 
 

 

 
 Colour symbolism in different cultures
 
 

 

 
 Colour and language
 
 

 

 
 Colour theory in culture - resources
 
 

 

 
 1.3 Colour aesthetics
 

 

 
 Colour aesthetics in art and design
 
 

 

 
 Colour grading in photography and film
 
 

 

 
 Colour trends and palettes
 
 

 

 
 2. Colour theory: the visible spectrum
 

 

 
 2.1 The physics of light and colour
 

 

 
 Light: electromagnetic radiation
 
 

 

 
 Optics 1: lenses and ocular devices
 
 

 

 
 Optics 2: electronic technologies and spectral analysis
 
 

 

 
 Why are things different colours?
 
 

 

 
 2.2 Colour in chemistry
 

 

 
 Spectrophotometry and colorimetry
 
 

 

 
 Metamerism - colour perception and matching
 
 

 

 
 Luminescence
 
 

 

 
 Colour chemistry 1: animals that can change colour
 
 

 

 
 Colour chemistry 2: photography and chromatography
 
 

 

 
 Colour chemistry 3: universal indicator and diagnostic tests
 
 

 

 
 Colour chemistry 4: fireworks
 
 

 

 
 2.3 The eye - how we see colour
 

 

 
 Anatomy of the human eye
 
 

 

 
 How the brain interprets colour information
 
 

 

 
 Colour blindness
 
 

 

 
 Vision difference: tetrachromacy and synesthesia
 
 

 

 
 Accessible colour
 
 

 

 
 How animals see colour
 
 

 

 
 3. Colour theory: working with colour
 

 

 
 3.1 Additive and subtractive colour
 

 

 
 Additive and subtractive colour systems
 
 

 

 
 Additive and subtractive colours on the colour wheel
 
 

 

 
 How additive and subtractive colour works when printing a digital image
 
 

 

 
 Practical activities: mixing additive and subtractive colours
 
 

 

 
 Test yourself: is it additive colour or subtractive colour?
 
 

 

 
 3.2 Colour systems: digital
 

 

 
 Colour gamuts and colour spaces
 
 

 

 
 How digital screens display colour
 
 

 

 
 What is Hexadecimal colour?
 
 
 

 
 #E86F1F
 

 
 

 

 
 Other RGB colour models
 
 

 

 
 How do digital images and videos display colour?
 
 

 

 
 3.3 Colour systems: printing
 

 

 
 Do I need to convert an RGB image to CMYK to print it?
 
 

 

 
 Process (CMYK) and Spot (Pantone) colour printing
 
 

 

 
 Colour management - what can go wrong?
 
 

 

 
 3.4 Colour systems: pigments and dyes
 

 

 
 Colour pigments: history and usage
 
 

 

 
 Mixing paint pigments
 
 

 

 
 Colour dyes: a (very) short history of dyes from around the world
 
 

 

 
 Colour dyes: methods and processes
 
 

 

 
 Colour dyes: synthetic colours and sustainability
 
 

 

 
 Special colours, controversial colours and interesting facts
 
 

 

 
 Problematic colours
 
 

 

 
 3.5 Colour wheels and relationships
 

 

 
 Interactive colour wheel and colour relationships
 
 

 

 
 Properties of colour
 
 

 

 
 Colour properties: tints, shades and tones - learning activity
 
 

 

 
 Colour properties: light to dark - learning activity
 
 

 

 
 Colour properties: monochrome (greyscale) - learning activity
 
 

 

 
 Colour relationships: bias colour scale - learning activity
 
 

 

 
 Colour charts - Pantone and Munsell systems
 
 

 

 
 Glossary
 
 

 

 
 List of Figures, Videos, and Tables

===== FILE: EPUB/title-page.xhtml =====

Colour Theory: Understanding and Working with Colour

 

 
Lisa Cianci

 
RMIT University Library

 
Melbourne, Australia

===== FILE: EPUB/toc.xhtml =====

Table of Contents

 
 
 
 
 
Cover

 
 
 
 
Title Page

 
 
 
 
Copyright

 
 
 
 
Table Of Contents

 
 
 
 
Colour theory: understanding and working with colour

 
 
 
 
Acknowledgement of country

 
 
 
 
About this book

 
 
 
 
Introduction: what is colour?

 
 
 
 
1. Colour theory: history and culture

 
 
 
 
1.1 History of colour theories
 
 
 
 
Antiquity (c. 500 BCE to 300 CE)

 
 
 
 
Middle Ages and Renaissance (c. 400 to 1600 CE)

 
 
 
 
The Enlightenment (c. 1650 to 1800)

 
 
 
 
Modern era (c. 1850 to 1980)

 
 
 
 
Contemporary Colour Systems (c. 1930 – 2020+)

 
 
 
 
History of colour theory: references and resources

 
 

 
 
 
1.2 Colour theory: cultural interpretations
 
 
 
 
Colour psychology and physiology

 
 
 
 
Colour symbolism in different cultures

 
 
 
 
Colour and language

 
 
 
 
Colour theory in culture - resources

 
 

 
 
 
1.3 Colour aesthetics
 
 
 
 
Colour aesthetics in art and design

 
 
 
 
Colour grading in photography and film

 
 
 
 
Colour trends and palettes

 
 

 
 
 
2. Colour theory: the visible spectrum

 
 
 
 
2.1 The physics of light and colour
 
 
 
 
Light: electromagnetic radiation

 
 
 
 
Optics 1: lenses and ocular devices

 
 
 
 
Optics 2: electronic technologies and spectral analysis

 
 
 
 
Why are things different colours?

 
 

 
 
 
2.2 Colour in chemistry
 
 
 
 
Spectrophotometry and colorimetry

 
 
 
 
Metamerism - colour perception and matching

 
 
 
 
Luminescence

 
 
 
 
Colour chemistry 1: animals that can change colour

 
 
 
 
Colour chemistry 2: photography and chromatography

 
 
 
 
Colour chemistry 3: universal indicator and diagnostic tests

 
 
 
 
Colour chemistry 4: fireworks

 
 

 
 
 
2.3 The eye - how we see colour
 
 
 
 
Anatomy of the human eye

 
 
 
 
How the brain interprets colour information

 
 
 
 
Colour blindness

 
 
 
 
Vision difference: tetrachromacy and synesthesia

 
 
 
 
Accessible colour

 
 
 
 
How animals see colour

 
 

 
 
 
3. Colour theory: working with colour

 
 
 
 
3.1 Additive and subtractive colour
 
 
 
 
Additive and subtractive colour systems

 
 
 
 
Additive and subtractive colours on the colour wheel

 
 
 
 
How additive and subtractive colour works when printing a digital image

 
 
 
 
Practical activities: mixing additive and subtractive colours

 
 
 
 
Test yourself: is it additive colour or subtractive colour?

 
 

 
 
 
3.2 Colour systems: digital
 
 
 
 
Colour gamuts and colour spaces

 
 
 
 
How digital screens display colour

 
 
 
 
What is Hexadecimal colour?

 
 
 
 
Other RGB colour models

 
 
 
 
How do digital images and videos display colour?

 
 

 
 
 
3.3 Colour systems: printing
 
 
 
 
Do I need to convert an RGB image to CMYK to print it?

 
 
 
 
Process (CMYK) and Spot (Pantone) colour printing

 
 
 
 
Colour management - what can go wrong?

 
 

 
 
 
3.4 Colour systems: pigments and dyes
 
 
 
 
Colour pigments: history and usage

 
 
 
 
Mixing paint pigments

 
 
 
 
Colour dyes: a (very) short history of dyes from around the world

 
 
 
 
Colour dyes: methods and processes

 
 
 
 
Colour dyes: synthetic colours and sustainability

 
 
 
 
Special colours, controversial colours and interesting facts

 
 
 
 
Problematic colours

 
 

 
 
 
3.5 Colour wheels and relationships
 
 
 
 
Interactive colour wheel and colour relationships

 
 
 
 
Properties of colour

 
 
 
 
Colour properties: tints, shades and tones - learning activity

 
 
 
 
Colour properties: light to dark - learning activity

 
 
 
 
Colour properties: monochrome (greyscale) - learning activity

 
 
 
 
Colour relationships: bias colour scale - learning activity

 
 
 
 
Colour charts - Pantone and Munsell systems

 
 

 
 
 
Glossary

 
 
 
 
List of Figures, Videos, and Tables