

===== FILE: index_split_001.html =====

First published by Times Media Books 2014

 

Times Media Books

A division of Times Media (Pty) Ltd

4 Biermann Ave

Rosebank 2196

SOUTH AFRICA

 

Copyright text © Design Indaba 2014

Copyright images © individual contributors 2014

Copyright cover artwork © Design Indaba 2014

 

All rights reserved

 

e-ISBN (ePUB) 978-1-928216-45-2

e-ISBN (Mobi) 978-1-928216-46-9

 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written permission of the publisher.

===== FILE: index_split_002.html =====

Contents

Introduction

One on one: Saville raw – an intimate chat with the Factory Records art director

One on one: Hyper designer – Naoto Fukasawa interviews Karim Rashid on product design and the future

One on one: A dedication to graphic design – Alexander Gelman interviews Michael Bierut

Conversation: Jurgen Bey and Richard Hart – product designer meets graphic designer

Conversation: KarlssonWilker and Stefan Sagmeister on their design studios

Conversation: Yves Béhar and Jens Martin Skibsted on design ideas and solutions

Conversation: Paula Scher and Dana Arnett on identity design and the digital era

Conversation: Milton Glaser and Massimo Vignelli – fathers of contemporary design

Conversation: Massimo Morozzi and Fernando Campana on “the future of design”

Conversation: Harry Pearce and Simon Sankarayya – life experience is more important than design theory

Conversation: Heath Nash and Hella Jongerius on craft in a contemporary context

Conversation: Fernando Gutiérrez and Ross Lovegrove on ways of working

Conversation: René Redzepi and Marije Vogelzang – food connects to everything

Conversation: Paola Antonelli and Marion Nestle – designing food education and regulation

Inside Out: Admen Andrew Whitehouse and Matthew Bull move to NYC

Inside Out: Architect Don Albert and fashion designer Amanda Laird Cherry play on the world stage

Inside Out: Graphic designers Peet Pienaar and Heidi Chisholm look at Africa from abroad

Q&A: Stop waiting, start making – lessons in liveability from Jeanne van Heeswijk

Q&A: Nairobi dispatch – filmmaker Ng’endo Mukii returns to Kenya

Q&A: Beyond Entropy Africa and Luanda the paradigm city

Conversation: Luyanda Mpahlwa and Mokena Makeka – creating an African architectural identity

===== FILE: index_split_003.html =====

Introduction

One remarkable, lesser-known outcome of the annual Design Indaba Festival is the interpersonal relationships that burgeon during this time. 

Having great minds in close proximity lends itself to conversations, the tenure and scope of which often proffer the best learnings of the event for those lucky enough to be privy to these electric exchanges. 

The purpose of this ebook is to share these fly-on-the-wall insights with a wider audience. We’ve paired some of the world’s leading creative minds and left the conversation to its own devices. 

Here we present these unfiltered exchanges, whether they took place over Skype or face-to-face.

As a whole, the conversations are a litmus test of the state of design. Recurring themes such as the effect of digitisation and sustainability on design are a sign of contemporary times. 

In conversation with personal friends, respected colleagues or fellow creatives, these design luminaries drop their guard to speak frankly and passionately about everything from the weather, travel and family to industrialisation and business.

Questions of working methods, studio size and the ideal client emphasise the often unspoken-about, unglamorous side of design. The ongoing issue of the difference between design and art reveals that existential questioning follows designers right to the heights of their careers. Questions about what the future holds resonate amongst their concerns. Insecurities, unrealised dreams and personal frustrations – accented with candid humour and shared memories – remind us that our design heroes are human and very real!

In this collection we have gathered a selection of conversations, traditional interviews and Q&As between designers, originally commissioned for Design Indaba magazine (2001–2011) or its younger online counterpart, designindaba.com. Expect raw and honest opinions from deities of communication design such as the late Massimo Vignelli, Stefan Sagmeister, Peter Saville, Paula Scher and Michael Bierut. Learn about the changing nature of product design from bigwigs like Yves Béhar, Karim Rashid and Hella Jongerius. Uncover the esoteric in explorations on eating design, and the everyday in discussions on workplace design. The series “Inside Out”, which speaks to South African designers living abroad, comes from Where It’s At, a 2012 publication by Design Indaba, guest edited and designed by South African designer and artist Richard Hart, who now also lives and works in New York.

Each of the 22 dialogues in this ebook is brought to life by the spark of brilliance that underlies the genius behind the designer’s unique approach to his or her work. While not all specifically about these designers’ creative produce, every story is accompanied by a selection of work that captures the essence of the creative force behind it. Together their words and images tell an extraordinary tale that captures a unique slice of the last decade of design.

We hope you enjoy the experience of “listening” in on these design dialogues. 

To continue tracking the conversation, follow us on Twitter @designindaba or visit our online publication designindaba.com

===== FILE: index_split_004.html =====

One on one: Saville raw – an intimate chat with the Factory Records art director

1 February 2004 

Sean O’Toole poses a few questions to Peter Saville and these are his pure, raw unedited answers.

 

Joy Division – Substance (1988). Promo poster by Factory Records. Art Direction Peter Saville, photography Trevor Key, typography Brett Wickens.

 

Joy Division – Atmosphere (1988). Promo poster by Factory Records. Art Direction Peter Saville, photography Trevor Key, typography Brett Wickens. 

He’s the one that dunnit. Peter Saville. He’s the one that influenced a generation. Including me.

Way back in the new optimism of the 1990s I opened a small clothing store selling skate clothing, brands that captured the mood of the time: FUCT, Label Whore, Blunt, Split. As a business prospect, my little revolutionary broadside wasn’t a very bright idea; Pretoria isn’t all that interested in rebel consumption. I recall one day having a perplexed debate with my business partner: “I want all our posters and flyers to be catalogued – just like Factory Records.” My colleague just stared blankly back at me. I, however, remained intractable on the point; I wanted to emulate the design cool of Factory Records. I wanted to be just like the mythology.

In an age that eulogises rather predictable gods, DJs, actresses and the like, Peter Saville stands out as something of an anomaly: the graphic designer as rock star. I can only think of Neville Brody as another instance of this rare phenomenon. Neither Vaughan Oliver (of 23 Envelope/4AD Records) nor Malcolm Garrett ever really generated anything near the same volume of hagiographic writing that informs the myth of Peter Saville. And what a legend it is. 

But let me reign in the hyperbole for a moment. In an interview with Sleazenation, New Order’s Peter Hook offered his own revealingly personal, if rather frank insight into Saville. “[He’s] an artist and a piss artist who never turns up on time and makes you months late … We’d have the record ready to go and it would be delayed ’cos of the sleeve. And where was he? He was fuckin’ walking around Paris with some model looking at perfume bottle shapes, the twat.” 

What amazes me most about this outburst is the extent to which it feeds the beast, the legend of Peter Saville. And there are many versions of this story: Peter Saville the elegant wastrel, Peter Saville the directionless savant – who scuppered a sure thing with Pentagram. 

There is a wonderful moment in Michael Winterbottom’s 24-Hour Party People, a film that incidentally features a bit part dedicated to Saville. Tony Wilson is in the toilet of the Russel Club. It is a moment of apocryphal storytelling, and Steve Coogan, playing Factory impresario Tony Wilson, pipes in on the voice over. If it comes to choosing between the truth and the myth, he says, he would always choose the myth. It is a telling revelation, one that probably describes how many of us would like to perceive Peter Saville, like some rare, colourful insect pinned under glass. Stuck.

The truth about Peter Saville is a lot more commonplace, and in a way twice as compelling because of that fact. As he reveals in his interview, he is simply a businessman, or more pointedly, an interpreter, someone with the capability to distil contemporary culture into a meaningful visual format. Sometimes, of course, his job has been noted to offer some darkly comical interludes. His sleeve design for New Order’s Blue Monday 12-inch single, widely regarded as a classic, lost Factory Records somewhere between 10p and 50p (depending on who you listen to) on every single sold. It also happened to be the biggest selling 12-inch of all time.

But everyone knows about Factory Records, and indeed much of his design for the music industry. In a series of late-night conversations, I choose to engage Peter Saville on life after “greatness”, life after Factory Records. As an interview subject he was eminently loquacious, and had a tendency to thoughtfully mull over his choice of words. Sadly there was also something of a well-practiced narrative to the conversation. This is not unusual. When suffering the public gaze, many famous figures tend to hide themselves behind broad strokes, painting only suggestive outlines of a life.

That said, Peter Saville did have a lot to say, his engaging manner yielding many genuine and surprising insights into the man. That they sit obscured in the sheer volume of his reflections merely confirms an age-old adage: the devil (a creature of myth) resides in the detail. 

You’ve just completed work on the new book (Designed by Peter Saville), as well as being involved in putting together a retrospective exhibition that features much of your design work to date. This must have occasioned its own fair share of contemplation, right?

From a work point of view I’ve been in a very contemplative frame of mind for the past few years. I gave myself the 1990s to find the conclusive part of my career. I did something in the 1980s that took me somewhere, created a profile for me, created a body of work that I was pleased with. At the end of the 1980s my first incarnation as a studio, Peter Saville Associates, was insolvent. My method of working was anything but guided by profitability, which I managed to get away with for a while, but as I employed more people and the recession kicked in, I couldn’t get away with it any longer. Peter Saville Associates came to a conclusion in late 1990, when I joined Pentagram. I was happy with what we had done, proud in fact. 

What was it like joining Pentagram? 

Pentagram was an introduction to the grown-up world of having a design studio. It was a company with an integrity, but it was also a different generation to me, philosophically a different generation. Colin Forbes had imbued Pentagram with a very disciplined operational structure. Pentagram had a spirit of designers cooperative, but it was run in a very disciplined way. By the time I joined in 1990, 18 years after the founding of Pentagram, the senior partners, I think, were more engaged in the business of being Pentagram than with innovation.

There is an innovation sensibility to graphics that is quite hobbyist actually, and you tend to grow out of it. Many senior designers evolve into business people, be it running their own businesses, or in their interaction with business and clients. That’s where you end up. And that was the culture of the Pentagram I joined in 1990, with the one exception being Alan Fletcher. Alan was still more interested in getting his brushes out than he was in courting the Financial Times. It was a fantastic experience, almost like a postgraduate course for me. 

New Order – FAC 93, Confusion (1983). Record cover by Factory Records. Design by Peter Saville and Phill Pennington, typography Brett Wickens.

New Order – Blue Monday (1983). Album cover by Peter Saville Associates.

Pulp – This is Hardcore (1998). Album cover by Peter Saville and John Currin.

Would you say your career has been one of resisting growing up and maturing into the roles you outlined?

No, not wilfully. A quick look at my history can suggest that, and I get that from a lot of journalists who do a quick look in, as if I am just some 15-year-old teenager who doesn’t want to listen. It’s a little bit more complex than that. I was very happy for a year or so at Pentagram to simply learn. When I started out I set up on my own; I had never worked for anybody. I’d had to gather the wisdom of experience myself. I didn’t learn it from anybody. 

At Pentagram I found myself in the midst of a diverse and cumulative knowledge base. I had seven successful design partners, some of them working in the latter stages of their careers, and another ten partners at various places around the world. I appreciated it, and I have continued to appreciate it. I must say that all through the 1990s, when I found myself on my own again, almost in every working situation that came up, something that I learnt at Pentagram was there as a resource to call upon. It was fantastic.

What went wrong then?

The problem at Pentagram was that they didn’t actually understand me. I particularly had a problem at Pentagram with the older generation. The younger partners were simply filled with petty envy, which I didn’t care for. I experienced the same problem after leaving Pentagram, for the next ten years in fact, certain clients and marketing directors of corporations not understanding me. They don’t understand anything about me and they don’t attempt to learn. I appreciate that in them not understanding me I have to take some responsibility to find the language to make myself understood. But I’ll only take half the responsibility. The other half of the responsibility lies with the partner or client to try to understand the person they are working with.

In the years after Pentagram I got particularly frustrated with myself, by my inability to find the language to bridge my instinctive sense of vision about things with business. That frustrated me. In recent years I have come to appreciate advertising agencies. They have managed to find the language, to translate what you see and feel, and to translate that into terms that somebody else can appreciate and understand.

But the senior partners at Pentagram didn’t understand where I was coming from. They didn’t like the work I was doing. They told me it wasn’t design. They didn’t see the point in it, nor could they see any value in me nurturing fashion clients or luxury brands. Even Alan Fletcher told me while I was at Pentagram that the design for New Order’s Republic album was not graphic design. The problem was compounded, at the time, by the fact that I didn’t find a way to help them to get it. I didn’t do myself any favours. Either going in late, and not wanting to be a part of the team and so forth.

And it seems Pentagram now values the work I did there, which in retrospect I find upsetting and ironic. David Hillman, in particular, takes a distinctly hypocritical position towards me. I was put forward to be a Royal Designer for Industry this year, and David had it stopped. He lodged a personal objection, which didn’t surprise me. What did surprise me was when I then heard that Pentagram now includes my work in presentations. The value of those fashion projects with Nick Knight for Jil Sander and Yohji Yamamoto, and Nick’s own book were questioned when I was there. The work was resented because it wasn’t profitable. They doubted the value of it then, but it would seem they don’t now.

I suppose some of this is reflected in the fact that you are variously credited as being a designer, art director and creative director. Which title, if any, are you most comfortable with?

If you want to get a bit of insight into what I do, there is one piece of press worth reading. Andrew O’Hagan wrote a piece for the London Review of Books, titled “At the Design Museum” (www.lrb.co.uk). I have never met him, nor spoken to him, yet after reading his piece I was astonished. As I read it, I thought, finally someone actually fucking gets it. He quotes me on my influences, on film noir meeting yellow Daytona (a reference to The Long Goodbye). O’Hagan actually understands what I do. The guys at Pentagram didn’t get it, only latterly, resentfully. Most of the companies I worked for, that I failed to strike a successful relationship with, were the same. For the most part all of them have subsequently gone the way I had suggested. When I advised them they weren’t ready to hear it, and for the most part they only found out later.

Following your departure from Pentagram you went to Los Angeles. What was that like?

While I was at Pentagram in 1991 I went to Los Angeles for a six-week period, to work on an identity for a television station. I have to say it was the most forceful impact on my visual sensibility in some years. Being there for six weeks, driving along Sunset, taking a call next to the pool on a cordless phone whilst having breakfast, it is a very different experience to Northern Europe. It is very different to being in London. It had quite an effect, the fabulousness of it, and also the truly awfulness of it. There is something I find fascinating about it, and that I quite like. 

After I was asked to leave Pentagram, I went to Los Angeles. After six months I knew in my heart that I couldn’t project a future in that place. I remember distinctly driving one Saturday afternoon, through Beverly Hills to Rodeo Drive, to go shopping – again. I remember thinking, I really don’t care. I was driving past these big houses asking myself, “Is that what you want one day?” I said no. Once I knew there was nothing there that I wanted, I knew I had to get back – very quickly.

Did your time in Los Angeles help you find the language to bridge the translation barrier, or did it remain a problem into the latter half of the 1990s?

For the most part I learnt the hard way, moving from one nearly successful corporate liaison to another. For example, I fell out with the president of Mandarina Duck, the Italian luggage company, by insisting that the communications programme for the company would have to penetrate the fashion media. I redid the identity in a way that would be acceptable to him, and suggested myself as a positioning consultant for the company. But the president of the company and I just agreed to disagree. 

In 1996, he absolutely swore to me that it would be over his dead body that the company be positioned in the fashion media. We had these ongoing debates for a month or so. It was really an Italian generational thing. Fashion to him was la moda, and that if he associated his product with la moda, then it would be out of fashion the next month and that would be the end of Mandarina Duck. I tried to get him to understand that wasn’t the case, that the fashion media is the canvas of lifestyle; that was where the product had defined itself, within the context of lifestyle. It wasn’t really about fashion but a way of life, which is completely what Mandarina Duck is about. 

The sensible, suit version of myself would have just gritted his teeth and persevered. Okay, we can’t quite get what we want but we’ll compromise. We’ll hold on to the client because it’s foolish and rash to say bye-bye, we’ll compromise and do what the client wants and maybe they’ll get it eventually. That’s where I disagree. From a business point of view I am my own worst enemy, because I am not motivated by holding onto somebody’s bank account. I am motivated by doing something good, part and parcel of which is doing the right thing. I’ll be honest and say that there is a high degree of ego in there. 

You mean in satisfying yourself?

Yeah. I am motivated by pride. I want to do the right thing, I want to do something great and I want to be associated with doing something great. For me doing something great is doing the right thing – in all ways of understanding the right thing. Timely right, prestigiously right, conceptually right, intellectually right and culturally right. More often than not I can see the right thing. These days, at 48 years of age, if an 18-year-old band is brought to me by some record company, I do not know what the right thing is. I have no idea. 

I had to do an interview with a magazine the other day about my show opening in Manchester. They asked what my favourite album covers were. I don’t have any favourite album covers. Sure, I have some from when I was a teenager but I am not interested in album covers at the age of 48. I am not interested in them at all. And I don’t know whether the album cover for The Darkness is right, or if The Darkness is any good or not – I don’t really care. (Incidentally, The Darkness isn’t any good.)

When it comes to questions about what to do with Jaguar, what to do with Fortnum & Mason, what to do with Mandarina Duck or the Aramis division of Estée Lauder, I have a pretty good idea what a company should be doing. Very rarely, however, do I meet anybody in the corporate world who senses that I might know, that I might be able to help them. And I don’t court it. I don’t go through the act of nurturing that kind of business. 

In London in particular, it is a very high-energy, high-profile competitive market place for design, brand positioning and marketing. There are a bunch of guys out there with agency backgrounds who really do that stuff, the PowerPoint presentations and all that. It is kind of grubby and it doesn’t interest me. It doesn’t motivate me. I am motivated by the situation when someone sits down and discusses it with me. I don’t need to go off and research for six weeks.

As I have got the hang of things over the last ten years, and also got to the right age to be able to do it, because that’s crucial, being of equal age or older than the CEOs, the balance is right. I remember John McConnell saying to me at Pentagram, “Peter, one of the problems is that you don’t have any grey hair.”

This intuitive sense you speak of, this ability to instinctively know the positioning of a fashion brand or luxury goods item, where does that knowledge derive from?

If you read the press, you always read about what time I get up and so on. In the O’Hagan article, he turns it on its head. He asks if I ever go to sleep. If we call what I do work, if we can call it that, I work very hard. That is all I do. I don’t go on holidays, I don’t go to parties, I go out at night, but to eat, that’s it. My entire life is orientated around a sense of what I am in the midst of.

Do you mean that culturally speaking?

Yes, I am in the midst of my times, and not strictly culturally now. It was cultural when I was young, but now it is more social and political. I am far more political now than ever before. And, for me, it is how these factors influence popular culture. This last year or so, to my feeling, something awful has happened to design, it has got what it wanted. During the 1980s I was part of the last wave of designers who had to coerce industry. Since the last recession, since the mid 1990s, the situation has been entirely different. 

The new generation of business doesn’t need any help wanting design. They want it big time. I know that my own work in the 1980s played a part in bringing this about, actually quite an interesting part because I got to them young, with something they loved. The New Order covers achieved something that Knoll and IBM never did, they insinuated themselves into the sensibility of young people.

It is very interesting how it happened, it is something I worked out in this reflective period of the book and exhibition. Traditionally design had one or two big clients and museums as patrons. In general, design didn’t really affect the mainstream. It was pleasing the converted. By injecting a sense of design into teen pop culture, myself and one or two other people set some benchmarks for a generation or two that they were able to take into their adult lives. 

This is unusual for pop culture because, normally, when you return from university at age 22, the Grateful Dead posters and Guns n’ Roses T-shirts had to go. Until the 1980s, you had to shed the ephemera of teen culture like a skin for your adult life, but not if you had a cupboard full of Factory Records. In fact, you wanted your business card to look like that New Order cover, and you wanted your first business to have an identity and a look of a logo. 

Pulp – We Love Life (2001). Detail from the cover design by Peter Saville, Victorian Ornamented Display Type designed by Louis Jean Pouchée in the 1830s. 

Are you not somewhat cynical about your achievements then?

Factory endorsed and supported me doing it because we wanted to do something well. We didn’t see the people who bought the records as punters or victims, we saw them as an audience, as collectors. I didn’t see why pop culture had to be so banal and immature, so tawdry. I thought, why can’t this music, which is basically a soundtrack to life, look good. Why can’t it look as good as a BMW looks? Why can’t it have a cultural content that is comparable to what we have in a gallery or museum? Why not? 

It is quite questionable how I went about doing it, but the principle was meant well. It was not done to seduce people into buying the product; that was not the intent. It was more one of respect. We said, we can do this badly or we can do this well. We chose to do it well. But business doesn’t operate like that, business is mercenary and ruthless. Business is motivated by profitability. It is not driven by good intent. So, design has become the servant of profitability. And designers are now corporate Casanovas. That’s their job, to seduce and coerce the consumer.

You make Factory Records sound as if it were founded on some very utopian, idealistic principles.

I spoke to someone recently who is preparing a book on Factory, and I said I couldn’t think of one decision that was ever taken on the basis of profitability, in 14 years. Nobody ever made a decision at Factory based on profitability, that’s why it’s a legend. That’s why it’s a brand. This is what frustrates me the most about many of these brands being rolled out now. At some point in the past all these brands were founded on a belief, on somebody actually doing something they believed in, and in doing it well. That is what is at the heart of BMW or Porsche, somebody wanting to make a good car. Those brands are being shagged to death at the moment. If it was just about survival it wouldn’t be a bad thing, but for the most part it’s to hang on to an unrealistic 20% growth target. I see a big problem in this, and I don’t believe in it. It’s kind of like melting down the family silver each season to make it go a little bit further.

===== FILE: index_split_005.html =====

One on one: Hyper designer – Naoto Fukasawa interviews Karim Rashid on product design and the future

1 August 2003 

Karim Rashid designs everything – even his own words. Naoto Fukasawa interviews him.

Karim Rashid is truly a citizen of the world. Born in Cairo of English and Egyptian parents, he was raised in Canada, studied postgraduate design in Naples, Italy, and today runs his own practice in New York City.

He has won multiple awards for his designs of everything from packaging to restaurant design, and counts Prada, Issey Miyake, Sony, Yahoo!, Cappellini and Umbra among his global clients. He has more than 70 objects in permanent collections, and his designs have been exhibited in museums from Philadelphia to Holland to London to Tokyo. 

The vast scope of Rashid’s work reflects his insatiable appetite for the new. If he’s not designing ashtrays and drinking glasses, he’s trying his hand at designer suits and cosmetics bottles. You name it, he’s probably given some thought as to how to make it more aesthetically pleasing, more functional and faster to produce. We asked Design Indaba alumnus and product designer extraordinaire Naoto Fukusawa to pose a few questions to Karim. 

Martini glass for Bombay Sapphire by Karim Rashid.

Copco kettle by Karim Rashid.

Copco flask by Karim Rashid.

For you, what exactly is design?

I act as design editor or cultural editor of our physical world. Ironically, the more product produced the more design is necessary, as the saturation of objects predicate a need to be improved, bettered, with higher quality and new ideas. I am interested in developing products that are accessible to everyone and I believe design is democratic. I design for everyone. Good design, as far as I am concerned, is a combination of these six points: relevant intelligent ideas, functional, expressive (its semiological appropriateness and aesthetic originality), its appropriate use of technology and materials, the product’s impact on the environment (its full cycle) and the product’s quality (including maintenance and durability). 

Good design can also shift and change human behaviour and create new social conditions. Design is really communication to a better, more utopian sense of our physical landscape and well being. Design and ideas can be disseminated through syntax, lectures, books, films, not just by designing a “thing”. Design is every part of life. Design is creative, political and social. 

Which designer/design do you respect, and why?

I do not separate designers from other creators in the world. Here is a list of people that I have learned from, that I respect, that shaped some of my philosophies: 

Luigi Colani, Ettore Sottsass, Joe Colombo, Philippe Starck, George Nelson, Charles Eames, Isamo Noguchi, Ross Lovegrove, Bruno Munari, Carlo Mollino, Victor Papanek, Frederick Keisler, Shiro Kuramata, Buck Minster Fuller, Toyo Ito, Eero Saarinen, Alessandro Mendini, Laslo Moholy Nagy, Naum Gabo.

Contemporary artists such as Dutchman, Gober, Charles Ray, Koons, Peter Hailey, Andy Warhol, Noriko Mori, Dan Graham, Robert Irwin, Mayijima, Pipilotti Rist, Chapman Brothers, Donald Judd, James Turrell; philosophers like Paul Virilio, Jean Baudrillard, Guy Debord, Jean Bachlard, Jacques Derrida and Tufen Orel; fashion designers like YSL, Bikkenberg, Hussein Chalayan, JPG, Halston, and the list goes on and on …

What do you think with regards to the relationship between the things you design and the people who use them?

The world is becoming very visually and sensorially savvy. The energy and times are hypertrophic, hypertextual and technorganic. Consumers are perpetually interested in being stimulated, in being excited about their physical environment. It is the residue of the digital age. If the virtual world is so flexible, personalised, complex and aesthetic, why not the physical world? 

What do you use as a point of departure for your design ideas?

Every place inspires me – I love and usually get inspired by the unfamiliar, so even the lost local places of industrial parks, airports, hotels in small towns, alleyways in big cites, taxis in London, a gym in Hong Kong, a bathroom in Paris, a prop plane in Sweden, a cinema in Milan, a Renault in Sweden … Anything that is new to my senses, unusual, odd, inspires me. Beauty is in everything. 

Generally I am travelling, designing and coordinating projects from the road. I love being on planes where I can really focus on projects. I can fill a sketch pad on a single European flight (about 100 pages). I write proposals, answer press questions, strategise, develop ideas and directions, and dream about what I really want to do – not what I think I must do. I travel about 180 days a year. I have crazy days in the office. I must sleep 7.5 hours exactly or I have trouble performing. I wake up at 8:00 am and brew the strongest fresh cup of espresso, answer all my emails (usually European or Japanese at that time), then go to the office (I live above my office – a hyperconvenient and enjoyable condition. It allows me to work very late), review issues with my office manager, answer more emails, write articles, proposals, etc. then go down the list of projects – meet with each one of my staff (I probably review/work on the design of 20 projects in a day with my staff – I have about 40 projects going so I manage to get to each project every other day), have two or three client meetings, have salad niçoise almost every day and soy shake (in a ten-minute break), drink four strong coffees and one late afternoon decaf – the Do cup of tea – and I keep going until about 8pm – then either go to the gym, go out for dinner, or go to an opening. I try not to work past 10pm because I work seven days a week. I perpetually multitask. 

When I meet with a client or potential project (I also create many projects myself just because I have so many ideas I want to realise – in fact, 30% of my office is conceptual non-client-for-the-love-of-design projects), I immediately have several ideas, which I sketch right after the meeting in a hotel, cafe or office. (If I like and believe in the project. If I don’t I turn it down.) Then I keep sketching over and over. Then I put together several of my senior staff and explain the project, the concepts, and they start to develop the concepts digitally with 3-D modelling programs. Then I review it – or keep thinking about the project, I research the possibility of the behavioural issues, new materials, new technologies, etc. and I share this information with my staff. In turn, I have people in the office researching the same pragmatic issues, and getting virtual, solid or real models produced. Each project actually has a very different process, sometimes vertical, sometimes linear, sometimes hypertextual. I used to do the drafting, the rendering, the engineering, the sketching, the entire process – but these days I do not have the time. 

A great point of entry for me is the digital age – that has afforded us tools that speed up the process, create better precision, better quality, more variance. (The profession is much less hands on, and more in the third order of prosthetics. CNC, rapid prototyping, solid modelling, new production methods, smart materials, parametric programs, etc. have really completely shifted the profession). 

Each project inspires the next, each typology has a commonality to the next typology, each morphology has its relationship. I really make an effort at staying broad. I do not agree with specialisation. 

This is just my impression, but I think that there is a strong link between your designs and fashion. Despite fashion trends being short-lived, there exists a certain attractiveness or passion in changes in fashion. What are your thoughts about the attractiveness of design and time?

Fashion has perpetually spun its wheels in circles, recycling. Design is based on new technologies, new behaviours, new materials, and new production methods. Design is infiltrating fashion, because fashion needs to catch up with our product landscape. For example in cosmetics, I designed over the last several years many projects that are changing the “perfume bottle” landscape. I see now everyone catching up. I introduced polymers, plastics, and new “mobile” behaviours that had very little to do with the bottle as an aesthetic sculpture of glass, and everything to do with the way we live and our integration with design and technology. 

Remember that many fashion designers are trained as architects – Romeo Gigli, Gianfranco Ferre, etc. – also there has always been a blend of designing and fashion. It is just that designers always looked down on fashion as something superfluous. I always believed that fashion is a critical cultural motivator and shaper and design is instrumental to it. I think it surfaced in the sixties when Luigi Colani did clothes, and in the seventies with Memphis doing jewellery, although even the Bauhaus and the Russian constructivists created clothing and fashion with design and architecture. 

Design will be like fashion in the sense that we are getting impatient with things in our lives and that we want to exist in a world that is about new perpetual experiences, not things. I see a perfectly cycular world developing where we will hyper-consume and shape our individual worlds – and everything will be disposable and 100% recyclable so that we perpetually change our environments, our spaces, our objects, our needs, our experiences – a polygamous object landscape. 

Q Chaise by Karim Rashid for Umbra.

Q Chaise by Karim Rashid for Umbra.

Frightetto Swing by Karim Rashid.

Karim Rashid and his Superblob bags.

The image of you as always wearing white is quite strong. Why is it that you wear white so often? Please also tell us what you think about the colour of designs.

I started wearing white, silver and pink at the new Millennium. I gave away my black wardrobe. Black represents negativity, Armageddon, jealousy, greed. I describe my style as contemporary, infostethic, and addition by subtraction. Style can be learned but the truth is that you are born with an aesthetic eye and sensibility so to really know proportion and balance – that is innate. So style is not just what you wear – it is how you live, how you think, how you exist, to be. White represents purity, clarity, positivity, autonomy and a tabula rasa – where you are free to think, be and act. 

What kind of things would you like to design in the future?

There is so much to do. I want to design cars, planes, clothes, houses, robots and shape the future but I think that the future is that we will own nothing – this is really nature – we lease cars, we lease houses, and soon we will learn to lease everything – experience it for a short while, and go on to the next. We will create a hyperconsumptive, forever dynamic, ever-vast changing human condition, where everything will be cyclic, sustainable, biodegradable and seamless. This is Utopia, this is freedom, this is nirvana. All the goods in the world will only exist if they give us a new or necessary experience. 

I want to host a design TV show, I want to create music, I want to design a small museum, I want to live in perpetual inspiration, I want to be part of the entire world, working in every country, touching the souls of everyone. I want be smarter, faster, stronger. I want to implant a microchip in my eye that allows me to see everything. 

I would like to live in 2030 (this is not a dream). By this point we should have the cure for cancer and HIV, planes that travel at Mach5 or 6, a global paradigm (one global culture), clothes that you spray on your body from an aerosol can, total robotic global production (no manual labour assembly lines), no high-tech products – everything will be immaterial for communication, entertainment and information, multilingual language voice chip, implants, anti-ageing … and Smartoos’ intelligent tattoos, a tattoo that has my ID numbers, passport, social security, bank account, e-money, etc. so I never need a wallet, money or credit cards, great virtual sex, creating by waving my hands like a conductor, no paper, no pens, no chairs, just a virtual plane in space that is highly customised, complete reconfigurability and personalisation of goods, we will all design our own objects and spaces – I can’t wait! 

We live in a borderless world now – all creative disciplines are blurring, merging, hybridising – in my studio I am designing buildings, interiors, fashion, objects, products, furniture, art, installations, music, film – a Warholian model – I hope to continue this and – although this sounds arrogant – this is all industrial design and all the creative professions will be under the industrial umbrella because this profession is based on industry and technology, all architecture is changing to become an industrial product, fashion is changing to become industrial products, etc. 

I think that you are a charismatic designer. Why do you think that you have gained this image? I think that you are a designer who exerts an influence socially. What is your social mission as a designer?

I want everyone to live in a contemporary world. Forget the past – live and experience now. I spread the gospel of design perpetually because I believe that design is a way of living, a way of thinking and a way of being. I have a great deal to say. 

Yes, I am charismatic and I believe that designers have taken a back seat for too long considering we shape this world. I am doing new things in the world, there are so many opportunities to change the world, then I change the public knowledge of this profession and future generations of designers will have so much more respect and ease in this profession. I think that it is great because this profession needs stars so that it can become a popular subject and be more instrumental in affecting culture. America has not had a design star since Charles Eames (40 years ago) and thanks to Philippe Starck and a few others we now get an opportunity to have a voice in the world. Design is like music or acting but much more complex, more involved, and we deserve recognition. My scope of work is broadening – I will host a television show on design; I am releasing CD compilations this spring, and creating my own music for fall 2003 release. I am designing clothes, buildings, publishing books. I want to write a book on the “Supreme Lifexistence + Style”, how to be smart, creative, organised, healthy, young and rich. (I am not all these things yet.) 

Why do you think people like your designs?

They represent and imbue all the energy, spirit and content that I try to bring to them. I have many unsuccessful projects too. I am quite critical about my work and I admit many times that some objects, ideas and spaces are not perfect. But I am always thrilled when I receive recognition from a consumer that they love my work. I was lecturing in Nova Scotia a few years ago when a 12-year-old came up to me with a limited-edition chrome Garbo can and asked me to sign it, and recently I was speaking in Washington and a 10-year-old with her mother came up to me and she pulled the “King” piece of the chess set out of her pocket and asked me to sign it, and her mother told me that she loves my work and thinks I am the best designer in the world. I was extremely moved and flattered because these children are the next wave of people who will grow up with design as part of their everyday life and are already embracing it at a young age. Ten years ago, a 12-year-old would be interested in Britney Spears – not design, so it is reassuring to know that design is finally making an impact as a public subject and effectual with popular culture. Children always react so positively to my work – because they exist in the moment – that is how I exist – the past is pointless – the future is fugacious. 

 

Davidoff Echo fragrance bottle design by Karim Rashid.

How do you join together design and regionality or cultural difference?

Digital technology is the instrument for the new Tower of Babel phenomena. The world started as one dialect, one religion, one culture, and then it built the tower of Babel to reach Utopia (heaven/nirvana/god). But god would not allow the folk to reach him or the heavens so he gave everyone a diverse tongue, a diverse culture, diverse beliefs, so they could not communicate. This is the beginning of the world as we know it – but we are returning to that global constellate – Utopia – and our one language is binary notation – zeros and ones. We will one day not have cultural differences, only create global pockets of perpetual new ideas from individual thinking. All humans are creative and we will all participate in shaping our global paraditic universe.

I believe that there is no more local – that local implies a way of thinking, a myopic way of seeing human behaviour in a narrow context – but the world is shrinking and global is the only way to perceive culture and to think freely, unobstructed by political, social, historical, and nepotistic issues. Local thinking is the nemesis of free spirit and real creative thought in our new globalisation. A new international style seems to have established itself recently. We are all reading the same books, watching the same movies, looking at the same magazines, listening to the same music, we’re even drinking the same soda. Inevitably our creative manifestations are starting to be the same. The concept of creative simultaneous discovery is based on shared information and so in turn, the ideas are becoming similar. We are shaping a similar construct, a similar notion of physical space and time. At the same time since there is no single dogma, no single school of thought, no formulae, no doctrine, unlike 50 years ago. Modernism is dead. Rules are dead. Humans can exist and domesticate in with a new freer spirit. The results are everything, everyone, every sensibility, every idea simultaneously in real-time anywhere and everywhere. I love the autonomy of an eclectic landscape, where all human creative thought and ideas are expressed regardless of their origins or of their history.We live in a time of NO RULES! and NO BORDERS, and of real freedom of expression. I like this contradiction, where we are influenced by everything, all information simultaneously, where things appear the same globally, but at the same time things are split into micro-tribes, into thousands of diverse sensibilities, of diverse tastes, views, beliefs, values and feelings. This contradiction (the global village versus an eclectic chaos) is our new contemporary aesthetic world that is a plethora of expressions, signs, logos, where there is no good and bad, a Nietzschian idea beyond good and evil in design. 

Please tell us about three of your own designs that you like most or that you perceive to be most representative of your work.

Design is in a new enlightenment where it will touch, effect, affect and be every part of our everyday lives. Design is making people live today, not yesterday, making us be phenomena logically part of this modicum – design is bringing pleasure, betterment, energy, love and meaning to our physical world. There is no turning back – finally design is here to stay as a qualifier of a better more aesthete life, poetic, smart, functional, democratic and hopefully seamless. I am not sure if I have succeeded yet with this criteria in my work. I like mostly the OH chair because it is five years old and selling more than ever – which means there is an appreciation for the fact that it is democratic (inexpensive), very comfortable, and engineered and moulded in a very innovative way. I would say the same for the Butterfly chair of Magis (engineered like an automobile) in the highest quality ABS plastic. I would also say the new Copco kettles (new technology), the swing chair of Frighetto, the bloob stools and the Kush for new materials and moulding techniques. From a more romantic and poetic idea I like Superblob, Orgy and Krysallis. I generally tend to like the projects that are not in the market, yet. Artists are always most interested in the work they are doing at the moment. 

Could you please give a message to South African designers?

I approach environmental sustainability from “material reduction” and deproductisation. I believe that I bring to companies smart efficient minimal sensual proposals that can reduce their SKUs (numbers of styles/variations in their lines). One product today should replace three at least – it’s about editing. 

A designer will be a cultural purveyor and developing products that people want to elevate experiences, developing proposals that actually really change our lives and bring a heightened – more enjoyable – experience to life. 

There are several strategies not just to deproductise but to develop successful products:

Design objects that meet all the criteria not just one. Beauty, performance, meaning, cost, seamless production, no hand labour, ease of assembly, smart material, recyclable, spatial, etc.

Show companies that quality creates higher margins and greater brand loyalty.

Subtract SKUs that are complex, confusing, noncommunicative, labour-intensive, made from too many parts, high maintenance, culturally irrelevant, etc.

Design flexible, extensive, relaxed, module, interchangeable, reconfigurable, multifunctional products.

Remove collateral, streamline distribution, manufacture on demand, drop-ship, local manufacturing, global positioning, etc.

Promote, educate, disseminate a direct simple philosophy – design experiences versus objects. Form follows subject.

I want to reach utopias, one global culture, one religion, the religion of love, harmony and beauty and high energy. 

Karim Rashid is presently designing LCD televisions, soap bottles, shampoo bottles; cosmetics for Miyake, Prada, Davidoff; packaging; furniture for Cappellini, Felice Rossi, Driade, Edra, Frighetto, Pure Design, Zerodisegno, Ferrachi Casa, Nienkamper, Magis, De Sede and others; glassware for Mglass, Nambe, Covo, Egizia, Salviati, Decorum, Arnolfo di Cambio; products for Guzzini, Umbra and Mikasa; lighting for Foscarini, Fabbian, Artemide and Nemo; interiors of restaurants in New York City, Moscow, Mexico and Las Vegas; architecture in London and Athens; hotel interiors in Los Angeles and San Francisco; his own shop, retail shops in Dallas and Denver; a clothing collection; jewellery for Golay in Switzerland; a Greek water bottle; watches, kettles, a thermos; carpets for Dreschle Teppich and L’Art du Temps; toys for Bozart; a hot tub, bath tubs… Street furniture in Tokyo, a new book, a TV show, a bicycle for Biomega, luggage for Leeds, wallpaper for Marburger in Germany and Wolf Gordon, dishware for Wovo, and he just completed editing the 2003 International Design Yearbook. He is also doing some art installations and painting shows in Graz, New York City and Paris and some objects for charities globally. He just launched music CD compilations with Never Stop Entertainment and a retrospective in Seoul, Korea. The list goes on …

===== FILE: index_split_006.html =====

One on one: A dedication to graphic design – Alexander Gelman interviews Michael Bierut

1 February 2005

An energy-filled dedication to graphic design, we have made no changes to the transcript. Be a fly on the wall. 

Alexander Gelman: I know at least four designers who have the New York Magazine logo in their portfolio. Did you actually redraw it?

Michael Bierut: It’s complicated. As designers, our first impulse is always to invent something brand new. Instead of sweeping everything off the table so I can have plenty of room to work, I’ve become more deliberate as I’ve gone along. I find that actually helps keep the clients more focused and honest too.

Deliberate meaning “not immediately killing” what came before you?

Yeah, or if they say, “Hi, we need a new logo,” instead of saying “Great,” I’ll say, “Why?” Sometimes I may not even like their logo and I’ll say “Your logo is ugly, but that’s just my taste. Obviously if you’re a successful company, something’s working about it.” If you can clarify those questions, it immediately helps you separate taste from whatever the process is.

New York magazine (2004) front cover.

New York magazine’s original logo by Peter Palazzo.

New York magazine’s second logo by Milton Glaser.

New York magazine cover by Michael Bierut.

New York magazine’s third logo by Michael Bierut.

 

“What is good design?” poster (1992) for the American Center for Design by Michael Bierut / Pentagram.

Poster for the Yale School of Architecture (2004) by Michael Bierut / Pentagram.

“Design Counts” poster for the 2001 AIGA National Design Conference by Michael Bierut / Pentagram.

 

Poster for the Partisan Project (2004) by Michael Bierut / Pentagram.

The objectives?

It makes them stay to objectives that aren’t just dictated by taste. I think taste is important too, and good and bad are still things we have to navigate between, but I think that in the end, it always helps to have objective criteria to refer to. In the case of New York magazine, for instance, it started as the Sunday magazine of the New York Herald Tribune with Clay Felker as the editor. It was like the New York Times magazine. And then when the Herald Tribune went out of business, Felker and some other people, including Milton Glaser, I think, bought 

New York magazine to run it as a weekly.

Yeah, that’s what I’ve heard.

The art director of the original Sunday supplement was this guy named Peter Pallazzo. People who are a little older than us all say, “Oh, Peter Pallazzo, he’s great, just great.” He was just a classic, old school typographer. The Herald Tribune had a wonderful, classic Times of London appearance. Now when Milton [Glaser] took it on, he single-handedly invented the city magazine as a genre. It just didn’t exist anywhere in the United States. More or less, between him and Felker, they defined the terms. In those early years, when Clay Felker and Milton and Walter Bernard were designing it, all the graphic genres they established, in terms of the front and back of the book, the way the features were handled: this all became the template upon which every other city magazine was built.

It’s the standard, yeah.

Then I think Murdoch bought it, then Murdoch sold it, then someone else bought it, then something else sold it, art directors came and left, and that format started degenerating slightly, then a little bit more and more. And in the midst of it, it must have been ten years ago, they brought in Kurt Anderson to be the editor. Kurt called me up to pick my brain on where the magazine could go in a design direction, and he said, “Well, what about the logo?” Milton had designed a logo that was based on Bookman Italic Swash, with a couple more swashes. It had never been changed.

Yeah, Bookman was very big at that time.

Try Bookman, if you want to revive something. Times is easy. Give Bookman a shot!

I think Bookman is easy, because Clarendon is very popular, and that’s not a big leap. But Times Roman is a pretty beat-up typeface.

Yeah, although I have to admit there are classic paperback book covers that I remember so well. The paperback edition of Brave New World by Aldous Huxley was Times Roman set really tightly and stacked so that “Brave” tucked in above the “New.” Ahh, nice. And it was on a white background with grey and black type. The cover of Catcher in the Rye, that’s Times Roman too. There was a famous book in the 1970s called The Greening of America, that had a Bookman Italic Swash cover, that was just like – wow.

At any rate, what Milton was doing was updating Peter Pallazzo’s logo. Peter Pallazzo’s logo was Caslon Italic, with some swash elements. And so I said that I agreed that the logo was looking tired and it needed something. I came back with two alternatives. One was a brand new logo. But the other thing was inspired by something I saw on Kurt’s desk. I had never seen a copy of the real Peter Pallazzo Sunday supplement edition of New York, the one that preceded Milton’s version of the magazine. And that magazine was sitting on Kurt’s desk, and I thought, “That looks really great. It just looks really great.”

So what we basically did was we took Peter Pallazzo’s logo, and redrew that, digitised it and fine-tuned it. I remember the new issue came out on a Monday. I was walking along with Steff Giessbuhler, and I said, “Look, that’s the new logo that I did for New York magazine!” And he looked at it and said, “Uh, why is it a new logo? What did the old logo look like?” Luckily, inside was one of those blow-in subscription cards, and they hadn’t changed the logo on it yet. So that had Milton’s Bookman Swash logo on it. It was a good before and after. But you know, after two more weeks, even if you could tell what was different, you couldn’t tell what was different exactly.

So what does that say about our profession? It’s kind of a useless exercise?

Is it really?

So much effort and no one can even tell the difference.

I think there are tons of things. Philosophically, I don’t think that the role of all design is to be seen, to scream, “Notice me!” A lot of it does its job beautifully when it just kind of runs under the surface of your consciousness. It was different, I mean it was demonstrably different. And it was different in a meaningful way, particularly in a sort of way that the people at the magazine understood. Sometimes it gets carried to an extreme, like as in redesigning the MoMA logo, which actually just got mocked so much by people.

That’s another logo that is in the portfolio of like half-a-dozen people.

Yeah, yeah. Bruce Mau commissioned Matthew Carter to redraw a recut of Franklin Gothic to be the official MoMA version of Franklin Gothic. Then they showed the before and after m-o-m-a, and you can’t tell the difference. I mean you can tell the difference between my New York logo and Milton’s logo. These two, you cannot.

Then Base took a crack at it right? And Ken Carbone before that. (laughing) It’s still a crappy logo. It’s still Franklin Gothic.

I think it’s beyond good and bad. Do you think you can improve it?

I think I can do something better, yeah.

I don’t think I could.

You mean it doesn’t need it. That’s what you were trying to say.

I mean, it’s an example of a piece of graphic design that is no longer defined by whatever formal characteristics it has.

It’s not about good or bad, it’s just MoMA’s logo.

Yeah. It’s sort of like the Coca-Cola logo. The associations are so powerful. Coca-Cola went to a big identity firm that will remain nameless …

In the 1970s, right?

No, they went to Lippincott in the 1970s, and did this great piece for them.

(returns with book)

In 1969, Lippincott and Margulies were asked to do an organised corporate identity for Coke. So here they’re linking it all to this idea of what the 1970s would be like, so they show the dreamy flower children, and the high-paced husband and wife, and people flying around in SSTs, and people having drugs or something. Beautiful Helvetica. I love it. That metal type Helvetica.

And look at this leading, it’s perfect.

They had ways of writing Coca-Cola and then they had this fabulous argyle pattern, and “Drink” and “Enjoy.” So that was the past. Here they’re about to reveal the new wave. Clear white page. That’s fantastic. So they say there are four elements: the word Coke, written in Times; the logo untouched the way it was; the colour red; and the shape of that bottle. And then they just put those pieces together, like that, and then they take that thing and turn it into the Coca-Cola wave.

Oh, so they did that?

Yeah, Lippincott did that in like 1969. And then, just like mathematics – just one two three four – and put them all together to conceive this beautiful thing.

But they cleaned up some elements.

Yeah, they changed the supporting type to Helvetica. Then if you look at these pages, they’re all really about red. Then there’s this little knock-down to a square logo that I thought was impressive. I’ve actually done a lot of presentations that have exactly this pace and cadence. At any rate, in the mid-1980s, Coke went to another firm and asked, can you update our logo? It was the time of new Coke, and they wanted to freshen up their logo. So the new firm did this stupid redrawing of it, for no reason at all. I mean, there was no earthly reason to do it that I could tell, it was just because.

Because the client came.

Because the client came, and there was money to be made. So I think sometimes there’s meaningless change, sometimes there’s change that means something. I favour change that means something. That’s a pretty nicely drawn curve, actually.

That was such a difficult thing to make, a curve like this.

Can you imagine? It was probably done on some huge hunk of cardboard.

Designers usually go to art school and get an art education. Therefore there is a struggle between the artistic ego and the designer’s mission to be invisible. How do you deal with that personally? You’re not just sitting in your office drawing letters. You’re speaking, writing, you’re involved in all kinds of stuff.

One of the things that I like about graphic design is that it’s a social activity, and it’s a democratic activity. When I was considering a career in art, whether or not I had any artistic ability to succeed at it aside, one of the things that seemed unpleasant about it was that it appeared to be very hermetic. You had to act kind of like a hermit and just sit alone in a room and examine your soul, and decide, you know, if you were Frank Stella, that you were going to make these curves, if you were Franz Kline, that you were going to slash canvases with big black paint paintbrushes.

Well, those decisions were very pragmatic though.

(laughs) Well, in a way. But I always thought that making things was fun, but that in a way it was cheating to just make it up any way you want.

Identity for the Museum of Sex (2002) by Michael Bierut / Pentagram.

Book design for Tibor Kalman: Perverse Optimist (1998) by Michael Bierut / Pentagram.

Identity for the Good Diner (1992) by Michael Bierut / Pentagram.

“Light Years” poster for the Architectural League of NewYork (1999) by Michael Bierut / Pentagram.

 

Brand identity for Ted low-cost carrier from UnitedAirlines (2004) by Michael Bierut / Pentagram.

Oh, it certainly is.

It just seemed more interesting to engage with something, with real content and then figure out what to do. I think that there’s a whole range of personality types and motivations among designers. There are some that really do approach it as an artistic activity, and look for clients that can serve as patrons for their work. I’ve never had enough conviction about my design solutions to do it that way. I need a specific kind of context and problem to get me started, then I can live within that and work on that. I have to admit that I’m open-minded to a fault about design. I like lots and lots and lots of different things. And I know, I’ve worked for, and worked with people who have much stronger opinions about design.

Your acceptance of things, probably even things that you don’t particularly like or understand, is it a result of your spending ten years with Massimo Vignelli, whose approach was kind of rigid in regards to graphic design?

Well …

Or was he?

Well, what I like about Massimo is that he stays very engaged with what’s happening in design. To me, better you should be looking at new work and getting very angry about it, and saying it stinks, and making a speech saying it stinks, than just retiring to your office and pretending none of it is happening. And Massimo is actually open to the possibility of changing his mind, of talking to the people who are doing that work and finding out what their motivations are, and having inspiration go from side to side across the battlefield, instead of just building a big wall there and calling a truce. I started out as a self-taught graphic designer. I decided that I wanted to become a graphic designer before I had met any graphic designers or gone to graphic design school. I was 15 and in high school.

So, as an alternative to an artistic career, you said, “I want to have a purpose and that’s where I can be an artist and have a purpose at the same time”?

Yes. The high school that I went to had a big print shop in the basement. They did the printing for the entire school system. And they had a programme where they had taught some of my classmates to become printers. So I just went down there and said, “If you guys need art for these things, anything you want, I’ll do it really fast, and I’ll do it for free.” So by the time I graduated high school, I think I had like 60 printed pieces. Almost all of them absolute crap.

Seriously crap? Or are you just …

Oh, I’d put them up against the work of any other 15-year-old graphic designer in the world. And a couple of them, well there’s at least one that I think is genuinely a good, smart design solution that I would be proud to do today, exactly as I did then.

I’d really love to see those.

I’ve got them all in the basement somewhere. A lot of them were just illustration-style, I had an R. Crumb period of cartoony illustration.

And you didn’t know any designers at that time?

No. But they had two things in the local library in Parma, Ohio, where I grew up. One book that had graphic design in the title, and they had Graphic Design Manual, by Armin Hoffman. And then I decided that I wanted to own it, so I asked my parents to give it to me for Christmas. So they went into a store and said, “Do you have this book, Graphic Design Manual?” My mom probably read it off a piece of paper, and they said, “Yeah, we just got that. It’s expensive, though.” It was a coffee table book that was Milton Glaser’s book. And they gave it to me for Christmas.

Oh, that’s a great book.

They’re both great. I finally bought a copy of [Armin Hoffman’s] Graphic Design Manual, and I have that on my desk, and I have Milton Glaser’s Graphic Design on my desk. If you think, the two of them are like this (spreads arms apart). People say that Massimo and someone like David Carson were like that, but I always thought that they were a lot closer than either of them might want to admit. In the way that they thought about design, in the way that they approached work. But there was a basic premise of graphic design that was so different between Armin Hoffman and Milton Glaser. In Armin Hoffman’s work it’s all about clarity, it’s all about reduction, it’s all about eliminating ambiguity. Whereas Milton’s work, particularly in that book, it’s all about excess and addition and everything. And what’s interesting, it’s not just formal excess.

Sure, he was celebrating form and colour and texture 

And images and references.

It’s a very rich book.

But the Armin Hoffman book, there was no page where he would admit anything that was inspired by anything outside of the eternal nature of the stars or something. Whereas Milton Glaser was constantly saying, I was inspired by Giorgio Morandi or, I was inspired by an old engraving, or I was combining the style of this with what I knew about that. I really found the work in both of those books really inspiring, and for different reasons. And I always felt that it was sort of unfair and mean that you had to sort of pick one. Why can’t you like both? The thing that’s hard, though, which I learned, is to actually do both. That’s the thing. Once you start doing your own work, you have to have some point of view that structures the way you approach things.

Well, I don’t think you can do both really well, but you can do something in between really well. Whether leaning to one side or another.

I think Michael Vanderbyl says that his mission has been to marry Joseph Muller-Brockmann and Pushpin. And he does it. His work has a simplicity, but also a richness and joy to it. So people do find their own ways based on what is inspiring. But what I’ve discovered is that if we just keep doing work, you’ll do four things that are just sort of whatever. Then you’ll do the fifth thing, and for no obvious reason, you just nail it. It’s a beautiful, effortless success. So you take all of those successes and add them up, they all basically look like something that comes from the same place, and that place is you. But the danger, of course, is that if you get too cautious about it, just staying in the safety of whatever that place is, shutting down all the other areas, then you end up just being redundant. You end up repeating yourself. You have to keep trying to stretch, trying new things.

So you think it was a good thing for you to be exposed to those polar ideas, in a very early stage, where it started you thinking about things? You’ve kind of continued questioning. And it’s the same question as between being a designer and being an artist.

Design is a lot of different things, even just within graphic design. The design of a perfume bottle versus the design of a train schedule versus the design of a poster for something at midnight on Friday night versus the design of a lost cat sign versus the design of an annual report. There are all forms of graphic design, and they require different kinds of skills. And one designer, of course, can do all of those things. But I do think that the way a perfume bottle communicates is different in some fundamental way than the way in which a train schedule communicates. Who is the audience? What do they want out of the solution? I think part of what makes graphic design so interesting is that we have that range of things that we can engage with. I think that stops it from being boring. You know, being an architect, comparatively, I think would be maddening. Just buildings, buildings, buildings! And that’s if you’re lucky! Just killing yourself over another building.

Or just paper buildings, paper buildings, paper buildings.

Yeah, yeah.

Architecture is beyond anybody’s patience. So you decided you wanted to be a graphic designer, you went to school, and then you obviously learned about other designers, and you came across Vignelli. How did that happen? And how did you get a job there?

Before I even graduated from college, I was in New York on a holiday. I had my portfolio with me. I knew a guy who knew someone who worked for Massimo. And he said, oh if you’re going to New York, you should have this guy who works for Vignelli look at your work. Maybe give you some advice. So I called him up, he didn’t have time to see me, so I dropped my portfolio off. And when I went to pick it up the next day, the receptionist got my name, and made a call to the back, and Massimo Vignelli himself comes out! He said, “You have a fantastic portfolio. You have to come work here after you graduate.” It was a dream. As it turned out, there were a couple of reasons why this happened. For one thing, I did have a pretty good portfolio. But more importantly, I think, I actually included sketches in the portfolio, that without knowing it at the time, were exactly the same kind of sketches that Massimo does. So Massimo must have had this weird, eerie sort of shock of recognition when he saw it.

He told me a while ago, that you reminded him of himself, you know 20 years younger, or, I don’t know what the age difference is. And that he immediately thought that he wanted to work with you.

When I think about it now, I think it must have seemed sort of startling to him. I mean, I didn’t know what other people’s portfolios looked like, I didn’t know what his sketches looked like. And I loved all his work. I certainly loved working there.

People accuse Vignelli of being super dry, but for Vignelli, graphic design is just one of the activities he does. He designed amazing chairs, beautiful glasses and tableware …

You put your finger right on it. Massimo is content to develop his repertoire of graphic design things very slowly, the same way an architect develops his or her form of language. It’s because he is different from someone who just does graphic design like me: when I get bored, I’ll think, “Oh, I’ve used that typeface three times in a row. I’ve gotta use another typeface.” When Massimo gets bored, he says “I’ve used that typeface three times in a row, I think I’ll make a chair.” You know? It must be very liberating. There were two things that I really got from working with him. One, like you just said, Gelman, he had this great way of putting graphic design in perspective. Where, you know, if it was a book design, he wouldn’t spend his time coming up with some clever place to put the page numbers or some clever little graphic tricks, the way a lot of book designers, many whom I admire do. I think Massimo would just focus on the bigger experience: the picture selection, the pacing. And he would get the pace exactly right.

And they are beautiful books.

They’re beautiful books! With Massimo’s books, if you showed me two spreads, I could predict what the rest of the book would look like. They’re that consistent and beautiful and clear. And Massimo is never better than, if a publisher comes to his desk, and says, I have this box of pictures, this box of drawings, this manuscript, these diagrams … and Massimo would have that all sorted out for you by lunchtime. And in a beautiful system, which hardly anyone can do anymore.

So what sort of system? A certain rhythm?

He did these guidebooks for the Audubon society, and then that got him a whole range of guidebooks for American antiques, pets, flowers, a whole series of beautiful little books. And those things are just staggering. They each have beautiful typography that organises everything absolutely consistently. He sets up some rules that are never broken, and yet you never feel the constraint of the rules. He could do it with any subject. I remember some neurosurgeon had done this atlas of the brain, you know, how things move from one part of the brain to the next. And Massimo did this incredible book. I was flabbergasted. Another designer, Tony Russel, had a friend who collected Hummel figurines, you know what those are? They were these little, kitschy, like kitschy beyond kitsch, cute little statues, originally designed by German nuns. Little apple-faced kids holding umbrellas, or little fluffy dogs: absolutely disgusting! Tony Russell said, “I’m not sure I can deal with these things, they make me want to vomit.” And the guy came around to Massimo, who took it on as the ultimate challenge. Wait, I think it’s in his monograph … 

(returns with book)

Oh yeah, here’s the brain thing. This is gorgeous. There is the atlas of the brain I was talking about. It’s just beautiful. And then these are those guidebooks. That’s the guide to flowers, guide to toys, cats and dogs.

Oh, these are brilliant. Those rules, with the text kind of attached to them … 

It’s just enough, you know. Oh here they are! It was these little fuckers. (laughs) But listen to what he says in the caption: (reads) “The Hummel book is a favourite example of how to turn kitsch into art. The idea was to photograph the little figurines from the ground as if they were real people. A graduated light background enhanced the illusion. A documentary section follows, describing the making of the figurines. That section gives dignity to the whole operation, by showing the skills of the artist and the craftsman. The book is at once a celebration of that art, and a sublimation of it.”

Isn’t that great? I gave a copy of it to my mom, actually, because she likes those things! Now I kind of wish I had one, actually. I wish I had it. It’s really a collector’s item. So Massimo had this great ability to operate almost independent of the subject matter. Whereas I think there are a lot of designers I know, who can’t work enthusiastically unless they feel truly sympathetic to the subject.

Do you think design was a sort of craft, craft of putting type and images on paper, and it’s never included consideration of the subject matter?

No, I don’t think so. I think there are plenty of designers from the 1950s and ’60s like Alvin Lustig, Lester Beall, the Eameses, Erik Nietsche, that were really engaged in visual storytelling of the subject matter. I’d say, above and beyond just resolving it formally and properly. To me, I mean, if you put Armin Hoffman on one end of the scale, or Massimo, and Milton Glaser at the other end, or someone else … Milton, it seems to me, is a designer who actually loves mess and variety. He loves to design a magazine because it has so many different moving parts. If Massimo was designing a magazine, he would say, “Okay, what do I have to do to turn this thing into a book?” A book that looks organised and elegant. Whereas Milton goes the other way. And Milton could design a grocery store really beautifully, because he understands that it has to look messy to look convincing. Otherwise it doesn’t look like a real grocery store, it looks like a pharmacy. Whereas other designers would just be repulsed by the mess, or would try to design it into submission.

Environmental graphics for the Minnesota Children’s Museum (1995) by Michael Bierut / Pentagram.

Environmental graphics for the L!BRARY Initiative, an effort to build new libraries in NYC public schools (2002-2004) by Michael Bierut / Pentagram. Photo credit: Peter Mauss/Esto.

It’s funny, Milton once told me a story of when he was young and travelling through Europe, he went to Switzerland and visited some of the designers. Don’t remember exactly, I think Jan Tschichold was one of them. He saw the office with all the books lined up, and all the pencils perfectly sharpened and organised, and he said, “Wow, one day I’ll have an office like this.” And he never managed to. I guess he had a real appreciation for that, but it wasn’t matching his personality.

Yeah. And I know a couple of designers who are our age, who you can tell have this idea in their head about what kind of designer they want to be. And you go to their offices, and you see that they’ve created this stage set for them to work in. To me, it’s never as convincing as someone who is more confident in who they are, and their environment just sort of expresses that naturally.

Cultivating that attitude of, “I’m a designer. I have to be dressed like a designer, I have to have a designer pencil and paper, and …”

Well, the other thing about design, which is complicated, and that can’t really be taught in school, is that any of the design arts, whether it’s graphic design or industrial design or architecture, is that usually you have clients, and someone has to enable you to do your work. You don’t just go off and do it independently. So that means that you have to be able to somehow convince them to first let you do it, and then persuade them that the way you want to do it is the way they should do it. It can be hard once the clients start asking these complicated questions.

Yeah, I remember you called me once asking if Russians understand the ampersand. (laughing)

(laughing) That was definitely one of those times! And you know what? I called Maxim Zukov, and oh man. You guys both gave me advice, but he sort of gave me incredibly comprehensive advice.

Well, he’s a total type nut.

He sure is. He was sending me transcripts of the proceedings of the 20th Typographic Congress in the Czech Republic, something like that. Perfect.

Oh yeah, don’t get him started.

Now, that client was like one of these big organisations where I had been asked to do a simple job. We had some different ideas, and we said we liked that one the best, and they should have just said, thanks, we’ll do it … Instead, because these big organisations have these different offices around the world, they send the work around and say, “Here’s a new logo, before we approve it, please comment on it.” Well, of course they’d like to comment on it! So, the logo had an ampersand in it. Someone from one of their European offices asks: “Do they have ampersands in Russia?” So they write down: good question – no ampersands in Russia? And before you know it, we’re getting all these e-mails about ampersands. It’s just a factor of all these different people kind of piling on and second-guessing things. As a designer, it’s almost impossibly hard work to steer a good design safely into port. And sometimes, no matter how hard you try, it doesn’t turn out as good as you want, and you have to settle for something less. But other times, if I don’t seem to be getting to the solution, I’ll just stick to it until I can make it work. What’s odd about clients is that sometimes this back and forth process actually does make the work better. They push you to somewhere that’s actually superior to where you started.

Very rarely.

No, I’ve actually found it a few times. It’s happened enough that I’ve become very careful when clients come back with ideas that seem stupid. And, of course, one of the problems is that they’re always trying to be helpful, but they usually just have some kind of problem, and simply can’t express what it is.

And that’s your role, to figure out their problem?

The difficult thing is that, in the end, there always comes a point when they have to simply make a leap of faith. You can’t prove to them that red is the right colour, or that this certain kind of curve is any better than any other kind of curve.

But you see, sometimes they become fed up with all these myths about design. Stuff that everyone blindly believes in and never questions. That serif typefaces are more readable, that black on white is more readable than white on black, although on the screen it’s actually the opposite. And you’re doing a website, and they say, “No, no, we need to have a white background because it will read better” without really looking at it and asking themselves, “Can I read this? Does it work better or not?”

One of the reasons that Business Week magazine loves writing about product design is because of all the design disciplines, that’s the most quantifiable one. If you design a toothbrush, you can say that 98% of the people who used it said it felt better, then the dentist actually looks in their mouth and says they actually got out the stuff, you know? You can’t do that with a colour or a curve. Graphic design’s function is so simple. As long as you can make out the picture and read the words, it’s functioning. So everything else is up for grabs. Whether it’s serif or sans-serif, whether it is big or small, on a red background or a green background. So people have just made up those myths just to sort of simplify their decision-making process.

And designers have invented a lot of it just to get their way.

To manipulate their clients? Maybe. I think these myths suppress innovation on one hand, and inspire capriciousness on the other hand.

I think it really clutters our profession. It makes things unnecessarily difficult.

I think so too. When I was president of the AIGA, I was always hearing about how we should go out and educate our clients more to make them into better clients. And I always thought that clients weren’t the problem. The problem is that designers are their own worst enemies. They’re not as smart as they should be, they don’t listen as carefully as they should, they don’t think enough about the consequences of their decisions. It’s too tempting for us to just live in a world that’s just you, the mouse, the screen, and the thing coming out of the printer.

And they’re too quick also to give up their positions.

And they don’t do what it takes to earn that position. What designers want is some sort of bomb to drop on the world that will let out this gas that will make everyone think, “Oh, from now on, let’s give designers the respect they deserve.” But there is no such bomb, and that day is never going to come. That makes it the responsibility of each designer to make the best case they can for their work, for their profession, for the value of what we do. If you want to be valued, you really have to be able to demonstrate that you provide something of value. That’s what designers should be doing today.

===== FILE: index_split_007.html =====

Conversation: Jurgen Bey and Richard Hart – product designer meets graphic designer

1 February 2011

Over a video call between Durban and Amsterdam, graphic designer Richard Hart meets product designer Jurgen Bey.

Richard Hart: Traditionally design has been about answering questions or giving solutions, but your work seems to be more about posing questions. A lot of the pieces are not beautiful artefacts that sit in some rich person’s house. In a way, the form seems secondary to provoking a debate. In that way they seem closer to art than a lot of design.

Jurgen Bey: I am a designer. An artist works differently to a designer in that designers always pose two questions. There is a question raised by the client and as a designer you try to either solve or rephrase the question. But I do agree with you that what is beautiful about art is that it starts a debate.

Richard: Another thing that strikes me about your work is the amount of intuition that goes into it. I have sensed that you are really confident in your own intuition and that you allow that to guide the design process quite a lot.

Jurgen: Well, if I had to describe myself I would say that I am the ultimate Mr Doubt! I’m the most unconfident person that I know, but I do know how to hide that quite well. So I don’t feel confident about intuition, also because I am really from the mind. However, one way to start a project is to build on what you know and another way is to just jump out of the plane. By throwing yourself in, you have to use intuition. I do think that it is a very important part of design that has been underestimated for a long time. Conceptual design has so much that you have to explain – what it is, how it should be and how it should be read. Perhaps that is the big difference between design and art. With design, you always explain exactly what is there throughout all the layers. In art, it is more open: The artist proposes and the viewers can reach their own thing. Art is a mirror.

Richard: But take some of your pieces, for instance the chairs that you made out of wooden planks that were incredibly asymmetrical. There seems to be not just playfulness there, but also trust that what you are doing is right, because it breaks the rules of what has come before.

Durban International Film Festival illuminated poster by Richard Hart / disturbance.

Jurgen: Maybe. That project started by looking at 1950s and 1970s Brazilian furniture and the way that I have been taught aesthetics is completely different from that. What I tried to do was to learn from it and be curious about it, like “How does it grow?” and “How do you think about it?” In a way, I was trying to sketch and animate. This is why I am so interested in illustration, as it is such a speedy medium. When I look at your website, the amount of work that you have made is amazing. Your process is ten times as fast as a woodworker. If I had to propose a chair, it would take me two weeks just to make the drawings.

Silver Sugar Spoon exhibition at the Liechtentein Museum in Vienna. Courtesy of Studio Makkink & Bey. 

Richard: Although, the first piece of furniture I ever made was a few years ago for a Design Indaba charity auction. I designed it on the computer, and had the pieces cut by computer and assembled by other people. Picking it up from the factory, it was an amazing moment to find that it weighed 20kg and was made of solid wood, because most of what I do winds up on paper that is ultimately discarded. It was quite a thrill to see something that is going to be around for 50 years, possibly more.

“One-another” by Richard Hart.

Jurgen: On the other hand, there is so much talk about the durability and environmental friendliness, and I can almost say that you are the most environmentally friendly and durable designer possible. In the end it is just a sheet of paper that goes into everybody’s mind and there it does exactly what it should do.

“Teen Dream” by Richard Hart.

Richard: I think when the projects that you are working on are high-minded and have some cultural merit, then you can definitely create something of value to humanity that maybe outweighs the cost to the environment. Unfortunately the reality of a commercial graphic design studio is that we find ourselves making brochures for clients where we will print 100 000 and you just know that 95 000 of them will wind up in the rubbish bin before they’ve even been looked at. And that’s without even calling into question the value of the message being communicated to start with!

“Dean and Rike” photographic print from More or Less Everything series by Richard Hart.

Jurgen: You said that working for clients means it is not always possible to have a real cultural outcome, but the packaging design you made for Woolworths had a very specific African atmosphere.

Masthead and cover for Enjin magazine by Richard Hart / disturbance.

Richard: In our world you have to be quite chameleon-like because the client, in that case Woolworths, can call you up and say, “We want this in this feel”. Then two weeks later they will call and say: “No, we would like you to reinterpret that in a completely Eurocentric feel.” You have to be able to move quite seamlessly between those things, whatever it is they are asking for. This is a big part of why I have started to make art for myself and for gallery walls, because I get to create work where the integrity is not compromised by a third party. I imagine you steer the way things go to make a Jurgen Bey piece?

Werkstadt Kabinett by Studio Makkink & Bey.

Jurgen: Yeah, but I don’t deal with the proper work anymore. Either there is money involved or there is so much other work besides the real design that you end up doing nothing else but talking people into directions. Like your art, I’m also now starting to search for a place where I can at least also still do the creative part within a medium. How do you feel being South African, with its own culture and politics? Do you look abroad to learn from it or do you feel that it is time for the South African or the African era, where something new is going to start from inside?

“Vacuum” from the Crate Series by Studio Makkink & Bey. Photo by Stijn Brakkee.

Richard: That is beginning to happen. When I spoke at Design Indaba maybe six years ago, I was at the press conference and the local press were grilling all the big speakers from abroad. It really struck me how at that time we had this inferiority complex, asking questions like, “How do we find our own voice?” We were really looking for approval from the international designers. I think that is happening less and less. We are starting to find something that is an authentic South African voice. There was a tendency maybe five or ten years ago, just after we became a democratic nation, where we were really stabbing in the dark to find something that was our own identity and it became a little bit contrived. It didn’t seem to come from the heart. It has always been my feeling that a national design identity or aesthetic is really just the product of a number of individuals doing their own thing, really honestly and with integrity. Through that, something that looks like an identity will slowly evolve. It is not something that you can just put on like a shirt. The whole African thing is not something I like to think about very much. I think where you come from and where you live will inform your work, one way or the other. But I have never tried to be self-consciously African as then it really becomes, as I said earlier, a bit contrived. It is nice to be informed without knowing that you are informed.

 

Pyramids of Makkum for Royal Tichelaar Makkum by Studio Makkink & Bey. Photo by Studio Marten Aukes.

Jurgen: It is more for the foreigner because I feel the same if people ask me “What is Dutch design?” I know I am Dutch, my work comes from it and I am very happy for that, but it is very difficult to describe. A foreigner can describe it, because they see clear differences.

Earchair by Studio Makkink & Bey. Photo by Prooff.

Richard: Getting back to your work for a moment, there is also a type of storytelling and, what I find very endearing, humility to it. It isn’t about gloss or slickness; it is about making a human connection. Is that a fair description of what you do?

Chair from Repacked Collection by Studio Makkink & Bey for Mitterand+Cramer fine art. Photo by Claude Cortinovis.

Jurgen: Yes, in that sense, our work is related. It is about communication with people. I am more interested in people than things, but since I am a thing-maker, it comes out through products. Storytelling is about trying to understand reality and how beautiful it is, and then trying to conceive this through making products as starting points to address people. As I said earlier, I envy you because your medium is so much faster in addressing people. Because it is a flat world and silent, you can just go into it and see as much as you know. It is a much faster language than words!

“Wow Mom” by Richard Hart.

Richard: There is a fluidity to illustration that is really wonderful. It is whatever you can think and put down. It is not restricted by the physical world or the world of what is possible.

“Duh” by Richard Hart.

Jurgen: Exactly, it is like another world. The nice thing is that you as a human being are restricted so you can never go too far because it is only with the knowledge that is in the mind. As soon as you put it on paper though, gravity and time are gone. You try to solve it by getting closer and closer, and the beauty of illustration and painting is that it is layer over layer. Anything that happens in between, you can change completely because it is part of the whole landscape. In that sense, I envy your profession.

Richard: Well thanks, I envy yours too! I would love to be making more objects, which I suppose is a big part of why I have begun to make sculptures. I am very seduced by creating objects and making things in three dimensions, which I guess is also a reaction to having worked for 20 years in two dimensions. As I said before, the bench that I made was such a revelation and gave such a feeling of joy seeing something that actually occupies space and has a lifespan that is longer than a piece of paper. So we each envy each other, which is a comfortable place to be!

===== FILE: index_split_008.html =====

Conversation: KarlssonWilker and Stefan Sagmeister on their design studios

1 February 2011 

Jan Wilker and Hjalti Karlsson of KarlssonWilker met while working for Stefan Sagmeister and now reunite as equals.

Dog Lamp by Karlssonwilker Inc.

Jan Wilker: Let’s start with something very simple. What hobbies do you have?

Hjalti Karlsson: I almost feel like my hobby is my life. My life revolves around the office and then my family. I mean I go to the gym once in a while …

Stefan Sagmeister: Hobbies are for people that hate their jobs, because you need something to compensate for something that you don’t really feel like doing. In my case, I don’t hate my job and never really had the need to make a little wooden airplane over the weekend or do Aquarelle paintings, or what not, because the energy that I need to put into things that I love and really interest me, I can get rid of in the studio. But I did used to do running.

Jan: Yeah, the only thing that I do is that I play tennis in the mornings. That is my one and only hobby.

Hjalti: What role does doubt play in your life as a designer?

Stefan: When I was working by myself, I thought doubt was a pain in the arse, because there was just this constant self-doubt and questioning all the time. It was a pain and it is very difficult to say if it had a positive influence on projects or not. I really can’t say if the project actually became more refined or more carefully selected because of the constant questioning. But as soon as I started working with people, this became much easier. If you are by yourself, you can spend two hours moving a headline around. If someone is there that you work with and that you trust, after a quick question, you can move on.

Clothes Pegs brochure for fashion designer Anni Kaun by Sagmeister Inc.

 

Clothes Pegs brochure for fashion designer Anni Kaun by Sagmeister Inc.

Clothes Pegs brochure for fashion designer Anni Kaun by Sagmeister Inc.

Clothes Pegs brochure for fashion designer Anni Kaun by Sagmeister Inc.

Hjalti: This doubt factor is the same for us. We can always bounce things off each other. In my case doubt only really comes up when I am working by myself.

Jan: How is the relationship in your office towards the people that work with you? Is it like with equals, like Hjalti and myself? Or is it more like teacher and student, where you give them an assignment and you work with them on the result?

Stefan: It depends on the people that work with me. With some of the interns, yes, it is teacher-student. But with my designers, all three of us work separately and together on projects. If there is a difference of opinion, then it is definitely me who has the last word, but I take the other opinions very seriously. My desire to control everything has became much less over the years. It is much easier to let go – I don’t have to come up with the idea.

Jan: We never worked and lived in the same space and I am pretty sure that I could not do it. You worked like this for a while and now you have separated it?

Stefan: Ja. Both were fine. I was thinking of doing this for a long time and never quite made the move. Now that the move is made, there are clearly a couple of advantages to having it separated. I mean, it was never possible for anyone to work late or over the weekend. Or, let’s say I might be done by six and could just go home, but instead of just sitting on the couch and reading something, I might have done some other work, filled out some forms or things like that. When I did it in the beginning, I was forced into it by real estate. I just happened to find an apartment with the space that allowed for both. I was very scared of that. I had seen design companies in Vienna where the home and office were at the same place. The designers would hang out in their bathrobes and work every night until four in the morning. So I was very strict with myself about not working on the weekends or in the evenings.

Jan: We have been in the same setup basically for ten years. And we have not really planned anything in advance. Every January we go out for a drink and we renew our vows: “You want to do this for another year?” I think that this was necessary after the first three years because it was so stressful, painful and just emotionally taxing. We thought that we just needed to keep it very light. We cannot – we shouldn’t – be married to the studio as if our lives depend on it.

MTV orb by Karlssonwilker Inc.

MTV orb by Karlssonwilker Inc.

Hjalti: Do you have this? In our case, we have never had: “In three years we are going to be this or we are going to have this and this …” Do you have these longer term goals?

Stefan: I think it comes through the rhythm of my sabbaticals, when I think: “What am I going to do next?” When I opened up, I knew that the goal was to be a designer for the music industry. And then after seven years, after the first sabbatical, I changed that and wanted to do something more social. I got rid of the music industry stuff, but added a corporate component to get some money in and do a self-initiated thing. And because of the sabbatical, I’m now going in that direction for the next seven years.

Hjalti: Do you still work the same? Do you start with a sketch and a concept? I guess in our case we often just start on the computer, and just do something and it happens.

Jan: Yes, we do make things before thinking, which is often not very effective, but it does surprise us; it is basically opposite to what the traditional process is.

Stefan: In many cases we still do start with a little sketch and then a bigger sketch and then you figure it out or execute some of it. But I am not necessarily convinced that this is the only way to do it. I do that because that is how I have learned it, and here and there I basically force myself to look at it from a different point of view.

Jan: For me, coming to New York with my European conceptual background, I very quickly wanted to explore more than that. A more unsafe way of designing where you can end up anywhere, even in very bad places. Then the week that you spent on it is completely useless. You know, when you just play, play, play, experiment and, in the end, you just say it did not work out. We like to work with all these different sorts of software and spend a lot of time with these tools, which is something that our teachers always warned us against, but I think that they were completely wrong. I mean they really didn’t understand. I think that design is more and more of an anomaly, and the younger generation is even crazier in that respect.

Tell Me Why autobiographical monograph by Karlssonwilker Inc.

Tell Me Why autobiographical monograph by Karlssonwilker Inc.

 

Tell Me Why autobiographical monograph by Karlssonwilker Inc.

Tell Me Why autobiographical monograph by Karlssonwilker Inc.

Stefan: I read an interview in the New York Times with Robert Rauschenberg about how he thinks that ideas are bad. To have an idea by itself is a bad thing. If he has an idea then it is either something that he has seen before or that he has done before. So if he has an idea, he goes for a walk to get rid of that idea, because he basically just wants to explore and have uncertainty of the exploration as part of the project. For the first time, I tried to work that way deliberately. For example trying to do CD covers in four hours and just seeing what comes out. Not sitting down and first making a sketch, but putting the music on, letting the music whatever, thinking at normal speed and then just going for it. Whatever tool was lying around was used for it.

Jan: We also do the real-time design things. It looks like we have another one coming up. Basically, we will go to Jerusalem for two weeks and every day for two weeks, we will produce a piece of design, like what we did in South Africa.

Stefan: I never saw the stuff that you did in South Africa. Did it come out nice?

Time magazine cover for “Lists” edition by Karlssonwilker Inc.

Poster from 10 Days in South Africa by Karlssonwilker Inc.

Spread for Time magazine’s “Lists” edition by Karlssonwilker Inc.

Sagmeister Inc exhibit at GGG and DDD galleries in Tokyo.

Jan: Yeah, I mean it is so spontaneous and some are really bad. Some days it’s not even about bringing the idea into reality – some days it is just not there. Then you would need three or four more days to push it, but you only have one day. Part of the day is walking around talking to people and looking, and then you only have two hours to put something on paper.

Hjalti: So we know from day one that some of the things are going to be so-so.

Jan: What is your favourite project in the past 15 years – if you take just one project?

Stefan: I would say Things I Have Learned in My Life So Far. It’s an easy pick because it’s 20 projects under one umbrella. Yet it was very satisfying on so many levels. Most of those projects were fun to do and even putting them together again into a book was fun. We liked the publisher who was a great editor and the book was so easy, and the project was successful. That was good. I like this thing of it clearly being a graphic design project on the one hand, but a self-generating project on the other hand. It was all done with clients’ spaces and commission, producing a strange sort of hybrid project.

Jan: Some people were also negative.

Stefan: The only really negative feedback about the show that I am aware of came from England. It was one of those things where no one that was negative on the blog had actually seen the show. There was much better feedback from people in New York who had actually seen the show.

Hjalti: Are you bothered by it if there is some negative reaction?

Stefan: It depends if someone comes up to me and says: “I really did not like the thing that you did.” I think that is correct and that can be very helpful. An anonymous blog with someone slagging it off, is sort of odd because it is actually hurtful without giving me the possibility to learn something from it. I actually liked Douglas Coupland’s article. I thought that he had some valid points and I thought it was well written. This guy had clearly thought about the exhibition and had an opinion that I could follow. If I look at blogs, which I try not do too often, there may be 15 positive comments and two negative ones. Of course, the two negative ones are the ones that I latch onto, but I still don’t learn anything because the kind of negative comments are not meant for me to learn something. I think we all as humans are inclined to take negativity more seriously than positivity. This is the reason why all the news is negative and all the attempts to write a positive newspaper or a positive TV news show fail, because we are not interested.

Jan: So you are prepared for criticism when it happens?

Stefan: We will see … I will probably still hate the criticism.

Puma limited-edition shoes by Karlssonwilker Inc.

Puma limited-edition shoes by Karlssonwilker Inc.

Still from Keeping A Diary short film, part of Things I’ve Learnt in My Life So Far by Stefan Sagmeister.

Still from Keeping A Diary short film, part of Things I’ve Learnt in My Life So Far by Stefan Sagmeister.

Creative Time: The Book. Publication design by Karlssonwilker Inc.

===== FILE: index_split_009.html =====

Conversation: Yves Béhar and Jens Martin Skibsted on design ideas and solutions

1 February 2011

Yves Béhar attended one of Jens Martin Skibsted’s Biomega presentations over ten years ago, the beginning of a cross-continental friendship.

Yves Béhar: How is life?

Jens Martin Skibsted: Good, good! Friday evening, I am looking forward to not doing much. Well, it is Christmas so I have to go and buy all the presents and stuff. 

Yves: That time of the year. 

Jens: What are you doing for Christmas?

Yves: We are going to Mexico. I have all my family from Switzerland coming. All six cousins with nephews and nieces – seven kids, my brothers, and my parents. Everybody is going to be there. It is just a beach house with nothing around it, so it should be relatively restful if it weren’t for the crazy kids. It should be fun. I can’t wait! It has been really crazy the past three or four months between the new baby, all the launches, all the projects, all the travel – it is pretty intense. So, you have interviewed me before, why don’t you start?

Jens: I interviewed you?

Yves: Yeah! For your book.

Jens: Oh yeah, that is true. Actually I do have a question. In the book, I discuss design being idea-led. Then I had a look at your website and when you define an idea, you very much define it as the brand idea. Why do you limit it to a brand idea and not just an idea?

Yves: My website may need an update! The ideas are bigger than the brand, but it does serve the brand. The idea is about how any project or any company becomes engaging to the world and is engaged with the world. If you sit down with somebody and discuss an idea like we are right now, it will keep us talking for a while. If we are just chit-chatting, we are going to get bored pretty quickly. Ideas define relationships, define dialogue, define connections. The idea is always the justification for doing anything. If not, why do we get out of bed? Without a strong idea, without a strong reason, it is pretty hard to justify doing pretty much anything.

Jens: That is a very broad definition of an idea. But while writing the book, I noticed that most designers were not necessarily idea-driven, but more shape-driven. The product is more defined by some kind of personal shape preference or what they call “DNA”. 

Swarovski Milan 2010 packaging by Yves Béhar / fuseproject.

Knot limited-edition lamp by Jens Martin Skibsted / KiBiSi.

Jambox wireless speaker by Yves Béhar / Jawbone.

GE Wattstation electric vehicle charger by Yves Béhar / fuseproject.

GE Wattstation electric vehicle charger by Yves Béhar / fuseproject.

Yves: You are completely right. What I find fascinating is that there was a method for how you would build a design career based on signature and hype. It is a very well-known principle that lived in parallel to the worlds of advertising and broadcasting. A singular simplified signature. In the 1980s and 1990s, that was the way that designers built a career, by stamping on an iconography that would be easily recognisable. Architects, fashion designers, industrial designers and graphic designers were doing it – that was how you got recognition. Now this world of advertising is crumbling. We are in a world of social media and direct relationships where everybody evaluates everything that is being said, produced and shown. Everybody is a reviewer, a blogger and a critic. It is very hard to then do that signature and advertising model of a career or practice, because people call you on your bullshit pretty quickly. Instead, it is a good time to be a creative that bases their approach on content rather than surface or form, somebody who wants to be much more engaged with the world rather than just disseminating an aesthetic dogma. It’s a much more interesting time in general, a more critical, engaging and participatory time for any type of creative practice.

Jens: Okay, but where I come from in Denmark, 91% of design studios are still sized between zero and one person, who guides it and does fancy drawings. These are usually the form-driven guys, because why would you set up a process if it is just you? The few remaining percent are big office-type design studios, which are actually much better at generating revenue. Now, if you empty out all the design museums and magazines, and put the collection on the street to measure how culturally successful the small and big companies are, then you find it is not the guys that make the buck that actually perform in terms of curatorial interest and longevity. I agree with you that we are on a threshold to something else, where it needs to be more relevant than just a fancy shape but, at the same time, fancy shapes are still the culturally dominant force. 

Yves: We are just in the very early stages of understanding brands and this social revolution age that we live in. To use one statistic: 93% of people online trust peer-to-peer recommendations. If somebody bought a camera online and they said that this was great, this didn’t work and this part is okay, 93% of people would trust that information. Only 14% of people trust advertising. If you look at that, those hundreds of millions of dollars in budgets that advertising receives are erroneous in this new era. I think a lot of companies should start thinking really differently about what they are supposed to focus on and actually put the product back at the centre of their business. 

Jens: The infancy part also goes for design. If you look at any creative industry such as music, art or architecture: When did they start? It is prehistoric. You cannot really say that this was the first building or that was the first piece of music. Design is very different, because you can set a pretty specific birth date as it is linked to our society being industrialised. Then, just as we’re getting started, we have the social media revolution that you are talking about, but you also have designers situated in an era in which we have to redefine what we are about. We don’t want to just be mercenaries of brands. I know you have done some pro bono work too and that can be part of reshaping what design can be about. 

Yves: There are three territories that I am just starting to explore; three new promised lands that I think are fascinating. The first one is reinventing the business of design – moving design away from consulting and closer to partnerships. A stakeholder is not a short-timer. Once you are a stakeholder in something, your design goals, attitude and approach are going to be different. The second promised land is the whole notion of sustainability and how it is going to transform every industry out there. Every manufacturing process, logistic system and element of how we design and consume is going to be changed by sustainability. It is another place where we are in a complete infancy: We are just starting to think about how, as a designer, our influence goes far beyond or through the entire process in a 360-degree fashion. We are pushing that with every single one of our clients, but it is simply a different approach that everybody has to get used to. The third one is, as you said, what I call “design-for-good”, but is essentially design that focusses on assignments that have a completely different set of criteria for success, compared to a traditional commercial product. People think that it is just about doing good or having a bleeding heart of sorts, but some of it is incredibly enriching on a design level. For some of the projects that I have worked on, the criteria are so unique that what comes out at the other end is a completely different approach to a certain product category, which is actually a universal solution. 

Jens: Just to address the sustainability one. I sat in a cab some time ago and the driver was talking about his Hans Wegner Y-Chairs, which he was rethreading to pass them on to his kids. For me this was fantastic, as though he was only ever borrowing the chairs from his kids. There is this interesting dialogue between how we see sustainability in Europe versus the USA where, for instance, the initiative that you are part of – cradle-to-cradle – is still feeding into the consumption loop. The consumption in itself is not an issue, it is how we consume that is an issue. Whereas in Europe one tends to ask the question: “Should we redefine how we consume?” By, for instance, not owning things but rather borrowing from your kids or sharing a car.

Yves: There are many products that need to be thought of in terms of re-use and longevity. We are going away from this notion of “build it cheaply”, consume it quickly and change it often – the Ikea model. Ikea was the popstar of design in the Nineties because “Ikea brings design to everybody”, but it is also brought a lot of crap that got discarded on a very short-term basis. Consumers are now in a place where they want everything. They want good design at a good price, made in efficient ways with healthy materials, etc. We can’t think of products based on price point categories or traditional criteria like demographics anymore. Things have to hit at every level now. 

Jens: The more solutions, the merrier! But if we don’t agree on how to solve some of the problems, then things that could have been green will not be green. For instance, it is really not good for the earth to mine aluminium, but once it is out, then it is actually very lightweight, easy to transport and can be reused indefinitely. If we don’t agree on having an aluminium economy where it is recycled, then we only get the negative effects of the process. We will need to have some consensus regarding some things being discarded and others kept.

Yves: You are absolutely right about the fact that it is about the performance that a material gives you and how we can be organised so that performance and that material isn’t used once and then discarded. It makes me think of all the aluminium products that we have in the food and beverage industry that tend to be thrown away. You use a lot of aluminium with your bikes?

Jens: Yes, which is why I am specifically concerned about it. I mean the bikes that I have put on the planet so far have not gone off the planet. The guys that have bought Biomega bikes still have them. A friend of mine has a bike that is now 12 years old and he is still riding with it. They are so expensive that you will not discard them unless you are really forced to. Do you know that KiBiSi will be opening offices in New York too? 

 

Tripart chair for Quinze & Milan by Jens Martin Skibsted / KiBiSi.

Tripart chair for Quinze & Milan by Jens Martin Skibsted / KiBiSi.

Brick couch for Versus by Jens Martin Skibsted / KiBiSi.

Puma shoe by Jens Martin Skibsted / KiBiSi.

Yves: Ah great, congratulations! What is the idea behind the office in New York? Do you have some big clients out here or is it the chicken and egg process?

Jens: The thing is that Bjarke Ingels of BIG is one part of KiBiSi and BIG is opening an office there. We will share it, like you are doing with David Adjaye and your New York office. 

Yves: Are you going to spend much time in New York?

Jens: I don’t think so. Of course, I will have to spend more than I do now. When we discussed sharing the apartment initially, I thought I would have quite a significant part of my life in New York, but now I am getting married to this Zimbabwean girl.

Yves: When are you getting married?

Jens: Well, first I am having this lobola, which is basically paying the dowry and how you get married in a lot of Southern African countries. That is happening in Zimbabwe with her family in a few days – just after Christmas. Then in Denmark there will be a proper wedding where you will also get an invite. 

Yves: Alright, I am putting it down in my diary right now. Yeah! Wow! Congratulations!

Jens: Thank you, thank you.

Yves: I am happy for you. Well, I will let you go then. Have a good holiday and let me know how it goes in Zimbabwe. 

Jens: Will let you know. Okay.

Yves: Alright. See you buddy.

===== FILE: index_split_010.html =====

Conversation: Paula Scher and Dana Arnett on identity design and the digital era

1 February 2011

Dana Arnett of VSA Partners and Paula Scher of Pentagram have been eyeing each other’s work since the 1990s.

Dana Arnett: How did you develop your personal style?

Paula Scher: Discovering that I could create mood and spirit with typography was amazing for me. With art direction I knew how to utilise images to make an impression, but figuring out how to do it with type, was much harder. It is easier to make an analogy to something if you have imagery, but you can still formalistically create spirit and mood if you don’t have imagery.

Dana: Maybe this is why I identify with your work. Whether it is a complex environment or something as simple a poster, there seems to be a singular statement being made. You don’t compartmentalise. Although there might be a lot going on, there is always something that hits you with an immediacy and continuity that is powerful. I think we both come from a place where we take elements that are classical and figure out ways to juxtapose and elevate them.

Paula: Definitely. I mean, I still remember your Chicago Board of Trade work from the early 1990s. I remember being completely astonished by the craft and scale of the letter forms, and how they were as powerful as the organisation itself. The design mirrored the action. It made you want to find out more about the company simply by looking at the design. I was never interested in financial institutions or financial reporting, because of the overwhelming landscape of corporate communications and annual reports at that time, but that work made me stop and pay attention.

Dana: Annual reports in the 1980s, whew. I remember there was usually one of two ways to approach that particular medium of investor relations. Designers would either impose their own creative house style that didn’t actually express the look of the company at all, or designers would comply with convention and the annual report would quickly fall into a category of bland corporate expression.

“Fucking A” poster for the Public Theatre by Paula Scher / Pentagram.

Environmental graphics for Bloomberg LP corporate headquarters by Paula Scher / Pentagram. Photo by Peter Mauss/Esto.

Chicago Board of Trade annual report by Dana Arnett / VSA Partners.

Chicago Board of Trade annual report by Dana Arnett / VSA Partners.

Chicago Board of Trade annual report by Dana Arnett / VSA Partners.

Chicago Board of Trade annual report by Dana Arnett / VSA Partners.

Paula: Do you think that people still know what annual reports are? They were an incredible design industry about 25 years ago, and the bread and butter for most designers. They are really like relics. Now and then you still come upon one that is designed with all kinds of fancy things – a pastiche of paper, ink, foil, stamping … I mean, what possessed us? When you consider illuminated religious manuscripts that expressed the power of the church, were the corporations the churches of the 1980s?

Dana: I think your points are right. When the Enron scandal hit, the reporting laws were rewritten and content legally started to migrate towards online reporting. It was basically one swift sword that forever changed the way a company communicated, the very way corporate communications functioned. But before that, I remember firms like VSA and Pentagram did reports that were vivid and significant strategic expressions of a company. Both of our firms worked on a couple of Coca-Cola annual reports and I will always remember their chairman pulling out his annual report at one of their all-company meetings and saying to his employees that this was the one book he chooses to carry in his briefcase. He didn’t necessarily want people to sit down and read it, but he wanted people to know that everything they needed to know about the company lay in the annual report. Sadly, in a day and age when companies need to instil confidence and passion in their employees and constituents, there’s not a whole lot of communications of this ilk or stories like this happening.

Paula: I also remember how stockholders felt about getting those incredible objects. There was something about the scale of them, the fact that there was perfect binding and the thickness of the spine. It made their investment seem substantial and believable in a way that we don’t feel about anything now. Everything is transient and instantaneous, especially information. Even your transactions. You don’t even have any loyalty to your own stock options in the company you buy.

Dana: I think companies are struggling right now because they’re not able to position themselves in a credible way. Consequently the media is doing this for them. Maybe this sounds too idealistic, but I believe the companies that are truly going to succeed in this new economic landscape are the ones that will figure out how to communicate better and define their bigger purpose in the world for their audiences.

Paula: That is funny because I think one has proclivities. It is not accidental that your most iconic work is with Harley-Davidson. I can’t tell the difference between where you start and they go. I mean, come on, you’re a biker. You are a guy who wears silver jewellery. I remember thinking the first time that I met you: Did they invent you or did you invent them?

Harley Davidson Eaglethon poster by Dana Arnett / VSA Partners.

Harley Davidson 105th anniversary brochure cover by Dana Arnett / VSA Partners.

Dana: I’ve always been emotionally attached to Harley based on my lifelong love for motorcycles. But Harley-Davidson, on a larger level, is also steeped in a more compelling idea, which represents emotions such as passion, rebellion and the freedom of the open road. That’s resonated for me and I suppose it’s those very things that have found their way into my design. Design simply provided me an outlet to emotionally depict that passion.

Paula: Well, that’s a complex association.

Dana: That’s how some people would interpret it. But don’t you also think that much of the greatest design ever produced has been grounded in a person’s love of the subject matter? I would also say there’s an emotional core to each and every organisation that a designer can tap into. I simply try to circle around that essence, and then shape and distil it into a compelling expression.

Paula: So what do you most like working on now?

Dana: Believe it or not, we’re starting to do a little bit of advertising and I’m actually enjoying it. Different from design, advertising has challenged me to translate an idea into a more condensed solution – a 30-second spot or a single ad. It’s actually a fresh and interesting way to reinterpret design to a certain degree. I also believe there’s is a lot of value that design can bring to advertising and vice versa. 

Paula: Do you get involved in the writing?

Dana: I believe writing is fundamental to any creative assignment. Fortunately for us at VSA, writing has always gone hand-in-hand with design. So yes, I do get involved with writing but I’m not a writer per se. With our expansion into advertising and rich media, I’ve been able to translate my thinking (writing) just as I did as a young filmmaker. Early in my career I did a lot more writing when I was directing films.

Paula: I kind of forgot about how film was a very serious part of your work. 

Dana: The thing that is so refreshing now is that in the old days you had to figure out how to fund all that, because the costs were so enormous. Now with the emergence of digital filmmaking and the deceleration in costs, you don’t have to face those odds. These days you have a lower barrier of entry and a lot more freedom. The great thing that a designer can add to filmmaking is that we were trained to interpret content like a storyteller, which is what naturally drew me to films in the first place.

Paula: I am fascinated by how many of my designer friends have brought up their children to be filmmakers. Besides having visual parents, their children’s whole life experience has really been making movies, because the camera wasn’t some exciting thing that you had to be wealthy to have. I am more impressed not just with the content, but with their natural comfort at being able to make a film anytime, anywhere without the discomforts, the expense, the nightmare of it. 

Dana: What is interesting too, I was listening to a lecture a year or so ago, where they were saying that because we live in the age of YouTube and reality-based programmes, younger people are actually questioning the authenticity of a company or their products based on the production quality of what they see. If they see something too polished, they are going to immediately question whether it is truthful or not. 

Paula: But don’t they know that something that is unpolished can be just as big a lie?

Dana: Well, I am sure that is the case, but you know by virtue of things looking real and spontaneous … 

Paula: But in fact reality-based things are “reality based”, they are not real.

Environmental graphics for the Children’s Museum of Pittsburgh by Paula Scher / Pentagram. Photo by Peter Mauss/Esto.

“The Global Climate” painting by Paula Scher.

Environmental graphics for the New Jersey Performing Arts Center by Paula Scher / Pentagram. Photo by Peter Mauss/Esto.

Dana: This guy was testing young audiences and gathering reactions to countless products tested. When they saw this product being expressed through a homemade video or on YouTube, the viewers experienced a stronger appeal and sense of authenticity. It clearly signalled that that younger viewers would rather seek the “real story” elsewhere than a company’s own website.

Paula: That is very depressing! I understand that there has always been a form in which things that were highly polished and finished were considered slick, and things that were rough were authentic. I think that it comes from the belief that there is something that is instantaneous and uncensored about an action that happens so quickly that it has imperfections. Typography is like that. If you make the type too slick or it is too computer-driven, it develops a level of perfection that makes you sort of turn away from it because we don’t see it as authentic. But you have to know that nothing is authentic because somebody is always controlling it. 

Dana: Okay, imagine if you want to buy a vacuum cleaner. You might naturally go to Google and type in Dyson Vacuum and the Dyson website will likely pop up first as they have optimised their search … 

Paula: Why can’t it be Hoover?

Dana: It might be. But a more adept, younger digital consumer might be inclined to go to a place or a site that shows the vacuum actually being used by someone that owns one. In their mind, this person would be suited to provide an unbiased and honest review of it. A video showing a real demonstration versus a corporate propagation of it on a corporate website is likely to become more authentic to today’s consumer. 

Paula: And you will treat this as if, because somebody is giving a personal view and demonstration, that this is more to be believed than a corporate website? Isn’t that silly? It is all manipulation. Why would one believe that one guy’s opinion about anything anyway? As much as you can’t believe the corporations, I don’t trust most people’s opinions about most things without knowing something about it myself. I mean you just can’t do that. I thought that people were more advanced, but maybe I am wrong. 

Dana: We could argue about this forever, let’s move on. What do you think about the profession?

Sappi Buttons book for McCoy paper by Dana Arnett / VSA Partners.

Sappi Buttons book for McCoy paper by Dana Arnett / VSA Partners.

Sappi Buttons book for McCoy paper by Dana Arnett / VSA Partners.

Sappi Buttons book for McCoy paper by Dana Arnett / VSA Partners.

Paula: I am actually very optimistic about the profession of design. On a personal level, the past five years have been a great time for me, because I have pretty much become an identity designer. I don’t call it branding, I call it identity. Branding is something that may happen in part as a result of something that I do, but it is not what I am doing. I am trying to make things recognisable. A brand is what somebody else brings to it, not me. It is what the audience feels about it. What is exciting about making things recognisable now is that they have to be recognisable on every platform. It has to be recognisable online, on a person, in another country, in a different language, through a building or space … The bottom of a shoe has to be recognisable. This is totally fun because you can create some premise and the premise can extend forever. You get to make it move, make it big, make it little and even make it intangible or sometimes give it smell. You can do all kinds of stuff, which you never got to do before.

Dana: I’m equally bullish. Now that we’ve officially entered the “Web 2.0” era, we’re getting back to some of the more important aspects of information and design. In other words, our infatuation with digital media is wearing off and we’re returning to things that matter, like content and design. Our first 20 years of digital design relied so heavily on “getting up to speed” on the basic technical issues relating to typography, composition and colour. It was if we were all forced to step back and rationalise how design could work within the confines of the particular technologies. And now that many of those utilities have matured so beautifully, we’re free to do more than ever. Sure, great designers have, and always will be, measured and appreciated for their talent and not their tools. But now, there seems to be more equilibrium and this excites me. So let’s get on with things, eh? Let’s start the next design revolution!

===== FILE: index_split_011.html =====

Conversation: Milton Glaser and Massimo Vignelli – fathers of contemporary design

1 February 2011

Two fathers of contemporary design, Milton Glaser and Massimo Vignelli draw on decades of experience in their dialogue.

Milton Glaser: We have to distinguish between a professional practice where a client and audience are concerned, and a personal practice where you are interested in the development of ideas that violate professional assumptions. Unfortunately they get lumped together in education but I think you have to be very careful when you are serving a public and a client. Students today frequently don’t understand that the profession is not about doing so-called experimental work. Schools are not clear about separating those activities. 

Massimo Vignelli: Design is a profession and has a different set of responsibilities compared to those who consider graphic design an art form. While the artist can and should perhaps transgress, the professional cannot transgress, as they have to deal with client needs. 

Milton: Every once in a while though, somebody who thought they were doing design, does enter into the realm of art. That happens because there are some things produced that go beyond the specific problem and somehow do something else, which in my view is to create attentiveness. Certain practitioners have managed to occasionally produce art. I have a very specific definition, which has served me over the past couple of years. I believe that art at its best is a meditation. If you look at something and it changes your idea of what is real, it is art. A glass or a piece of furniture can produce this effect. It is very hard to do intentionally. Then, every once in a while, something enters the world that goes beyond its functional requirement and gets into what you might call an experience. 

Massimo: People ask me that very often: What is the difference between art and design? I say design is utilitarian; art is useful and non-utilitarian. Design is utilitarian, but sometimes it is not even useful. So in design, the more you go towards art, the less it is designing. In art, the more you work to do a design, the less art it is. 

Milton: Some things function in both ways. It can be a work of design that does what it is supposed to do, while also elevating your understanding of reality. That is what happens at the very best level, but it occurs infrequently.

Massimo: And when an artist reaches that level, automatically it is timeless. It becomes good forever. 

Bob Dylan poster by Milton Glaser.

Melting Pot collage of USA flag by Massimo Vignelli.

Journal, poster, stationery and catalogue design for Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies by Massimo Vignelli.

Milton: If it performs another function, the question is: What is that function? Beauty and aesthetics is part of what we do and, in my construction, beauty is merely a device to lead someone to attentiveness. You are led to awareness through beauty, because beauty is so attractive. We are programmed as a species to move towards beauty. The idea of aesthetics is in our brain, in our cells, and we are moved by the idea of beauty. What does it mean about the shape of a glass that makes one beautiful and another ugly? We have to examine this judgement that we all make. The issue of beauty in some way affects all professional practitioners. 

Massimo: I don’t have that intent first and foremost. I am fascinated by the problem. Maybe it is because of my semiotic approach to life, where I like understanding what that product should be: What is the destination of it? What is the market for it? Will that alter? Who is the client? What kind of position must that type of product have compared to its competition? I am fascinated by all these elements and, by finding all these things, the answer comes about without thinking. The second element is the syntactical element when I start to work on the product and try to be consistent about every detail, matching everything – this means this and that means that, or this is right and that is wrong – according to the goal that you set for yourself. Thirdly, the pragmatic aspect of being confirmed by the client. When they understand what you have done, that expresses what you wanted to do. So I’m not motivated by something being noticeable, because I think that being noticeable is more of an artist type of endeavour. 

Milton: Nobody good in this field or at the highest level has done it for either notoriety or money. They all loved their work. They were passionate and curious about it. Nevertheless we’re in business and one of the problems is getting significant work. You want people to come to you with a big project, not just a little paperback book. This is the reason why fame or notoriety is important. If you don’t become known, you will only get modest assignments. In order to have a career, you have to be conscious of the effect of your work on the world. If the work is not extraordinary, you are not going to get anywhere. 

Massimo: To me, the work was always the by-product of an approach and a concept. Looking back at my life, when I started, I was anxious to do certain kinds of graphic structures and typography based on understanding the product – the semantics, syntax etc. Once I became good at doing small jobs, I wanted to get big jobs, which is why we started Unimark. We realised that large corporations didn’t like to talk to studios, they like to talk to other corporations. So we started Unimark with offices all around the world – a huge structure – so that corporations would feel comfortable and we could finally get jobs that we wanted to do. This is exactly what we got and the theory really worked out. The aim was to perfect the environment and substitute the trash with things that we thought were less trashy, which was our kind of design. 

Milton: But that was not your client’s aim. Your client’s aim was not exactly your aim, although they were often congruent. Your client’s aim was to make more money, by presenting a style that was acceptable to a public who would feel secure by seeing things within a corporate vernacular. 

Massimo: A good building costs no more or less than a bad building, and a good design costs no more than a bad design. Our aim was to transform these guys, giving them a different motivation for doing things besides the obvious one. There are tangible and intangible aspects. The profession takes care of the tangible aspect and the good professional can inject intangible values. Even a bad designer can cover the tangible aspects in a fairly good way unless he is very bad.

Milton: My problem is with the definition of good and bad. At this point, helping a bank sell more phony products to the public is not a good objective, so my instinct would be not to do anything for the bank. 

Massimo: You can refuse the client. Or you can do it in a way that is less offensive, more consistent, more economical and more elegant, raising the standard of the cultural level to a higher level of appreciation.

Milton: If you could convince the bank that by virtue of more elegant typography, they would be more honest in their dealings with the public, that would be something. I sense that you believe that by elevating all this stuff to another level of understanding that even the bank’s president would feel more inclined to be more honest in his dealings?

Massimo: Not necessarily honest, but might acquire a better sense of quality. Therefore when he chooses an architect, he will choose a better architect than before and a new sense of quality that he didn’t have before will start to permeate his life. But if he is an unethical person, chances are that he will never understand anything good. You can’t give good design to Al Capone – he would never get it.

Milton: I would not easily admit this, but we have done some consulting for a big drug company that is doing extraordinary architecture with only the best architects in the world. But at the same time, they were just brought up on charges for milking the public and sued for a billion dollars for some kind of scam. How do you fit those two things in your mind? Is consulting on the aesthetics of the building unrelated to the activity of the corporation? 

Massimo: Moral issues in our profession are very important. When I was a student in architecture, one of the typical conversations was: Will you ever design a church? You’d say: Yeah. Would you design a theatre? Oh yeah! A hospital? Yes, yes. Would you design a whorehouse? And there was the no. But then you grow up and begin to think that if the whorehouse exists, why should it be so gross and kitsch? Can’t we design a whorehouse that is elegant, which the world is full of now, as it turns out. It is similar to the issue that you just mentioned. Should we work for a client that does that? I think that what they do in the pharmacy business is their business and really doesn’t relate to their image in a sense. A building is a building – why have a bad building when you can have a good building? The communication, package, signage, exhibitions and all those things, can be good. By doing all these things well, they cast an image of themselves as a terrific company. If they are a terrific company and the answer is rotten, then our thinking collapses. But that might just be a detail on a specific aspect of their product, while the cultural benefit is positive. Do I like a company that does these things or do I prefer a company that makes a terrific ethical product, but has a lousy image? I think I may go with the first!

Milton: Given the choice of a terrific product badly sold or a fake product beautifully sold, I would have to go with the good product. I wrote a piece called the “Road to Hell”, which is a series of complex questions about ethics and in the middle of it I asked: “Would you work for a manufacturer who used child labour to make T-shirts?” In a class of 20 kids, none would work for anybody who uses child labour. The final question is: “Would you work for a manufacturer whose product could cause the death of the user like cigarettes?” In that question, half the kids said that they would. They said that because people know that cigarettes cause cancer and that they could die, they choose to do it, which is fine. But why do you want to be part of that? Suppose it is true that people know that they may die and that it is their responsibility, why do you want to have anything to do with designing a cigarette package even as a consequence that somebody is aware? Sometimes people don’t think things through – they are willing to participate in somebody’s death but they are not willing to do work that employs child labour. I don’t get it!

Massimo: That’s funny because I designed a lot of cigarette packages long before anybody said that it could kill you. 

Milton: I think it is a tough question because, besides the unintended consequences, very often you don’t know the consequences of what you do. 

Massimo: You mentioned this intriguing issue of the rational versus the passionate or romantic earlier. 

Milton: A colleague of mine went to the Mothball a few weeks ago. It is an event where people stand on a platform and just tell a story of about five or ten minutes long on any topic. She was amazed at how emotional she was listening to the stories. This is as direct an experience as you can get: one person by themselves, telling a story, that’s all. It is also a good example of there being form and content in every experience. The content is what the narrative is, what the story is. The form is the way it was told, which is the person that told the story. In every case there are four options: an interesting story badly told; an interesting story told interestingly; a bad story told badly; and a bad story told interestingly. The last is the most mysterious part: a person can tell you the stupidest story, a story that has virtually no content, but you are fascinated because of its form, that is the way they tell it. Everything we do is divided that way, every job you ever do. Either you have a good piece of material to work on and you do an excellent job of it, or else you have a terrible or ordinary thing to work on and you transform it. Of course, that is what designers really get paid to do more often than not – to take ordinary content, an ordinary service, bank or anything, and make it seem like something else. The magic occurs when you can’t tell the difference between form and content: when the distinction between the narrative and its expression is not separate. When we say that could not have been done any other way. Those are the hardest to do. I think that the longer you are in the field and the more ambitious you are, the more you aspire to that objective.

New York identity design by Milton Glaser.

American Airlines identity and branding by Massimo Vignelli.

Brooklyn Lager packaging by Milton Glaser.

Massimo: That leads to the issue of subjectivity and objectivity again. In design, I always try to be as objective as I can toward the content, although even objectivity is subjective. Nonetheless, I look for objectivity and like to be as transparent as possible. The issue of style never really comes to my mind. In fact, I negated the search for style from the very beginning. Style in our profession is like handwriting. You might control your handwriting in the beginning to a certain extent, but in the end it goes its own way, becoming what it wants to be, what it has to be. When style prevails over the content or task, I think it is detrimental as it becomes contrived. 

Milton: I would agree to a large extent, but the interesting thing about style for me is style of thought. Style of thought is a way of thinking. How do you think about things? There is a distinction in style in the way that people think – some think obliquely, some surrealistically, some in terms of harmony, and every other way as well. You are quite right that it gets disturbing when somebody approaches something with a style in mind as opposed to the style emerging from the act of doing the work. However, there is no question about there being a style of the moment. If you are young and want to work, in most cases you have to work within the vernacular of the moment. Your work must look like other work of its period. If you introduce an entirely new way of working, you will be isolated or marginalised. 

Massimo: Sometimes you might see trends reflected in certain solutions and things that you do. If it is too trendy, you must throw it away because you don’t want to be caught in that trap. Lella is very good at pointing trends out all the time.

Milton: It also depends on what products you are in. If you are not conscious of trends, you should not be in the design business. I mean trends are what the design business lives on. Fashion lives on trends.

Massimo: Fashion lives on trends, but not design.

Milton: Typography is trendy. All this stuff is trendy because they are of the moment. On the other hand there are those things that you hope will transcend their mobility, but that is not much of the field. Most of the field is based on acknowledging what is around and responding to it – that is the biggest part of the work. 

Massimo: In my work, I really react strongly to clients in explaining why it is important that something is not trendy because I feel a responsibility toward the client to design something that is going to last a long time and doesn’t have to be thrown away in a few years from now. 

New York City Subway map (2008) by Massimo Vignelli.

New York Subways signage (1960s) by Massimo Vignelli.

 

School of Visual Arts Theater façade by Milton Glaser.

Milton: You are lucky that you have been able to build a position that is about durability and not trendiness. It is about values that seem enduring and that somebody can depend on, as it will not vanish or look stupid next year. But that is not actually a position that many can take – it is a rare position. 

Massimo: There is a moral imperative for designers that are dedicated to these issues to convey this issue to their clients. It is partly the role and responsibility of the designer towards themselves and the company, the products, the clients and the market not to do things that are trashable next year. 

Milton: When you use the term trashy, I would suggest that not all trendy things are necessarily trash.

Massimo: Trendiness is trash because next year, when it is over, it becomes trash right away!

===== FILE: index_split_012.html =====

Conversation: Massimo Morozzi and Fernando Campana on “the future of design”

1 February 2011

Massimo Morozzi first saw the Vermelha chair by the Campana Brothers in 1997 in a magazine. Thirteen years later …

Massimo Morozzi: Hello? Can you hear me?

Fernando Campana: Now I hear you fine.

Massimo: I can hear you … Hi … Hello?

Fernando: Hey, how are you? Everything okay?

Massimo: Absolutely. And you?

Fernando: We just got back from Paris and now, Friday, we’re going on vacation.

Massimo: Where are you going?

Fernando: First to Brotas and then to Recife. I’ll be back on 5 January, then part of the studio staff comes back on the 10th, then everyone on the 17th. In any case, we’ll be on vacation from 17 December to 17 January. How about you? Where will you go?

Massimo: I’ll be staying here in Bolgheri.

Fernando: Okay, and we’ll be there on 27 or 28 January.

Massimo: Of course. We here at Edra will get the prototype for the armchair ready and then we’ll get together.

Fernando: Good, I just wanted to plan where we could stay if you’re going to do that party on the 29th in Bolgheri.

Massimo: I’m organising everything for you. Don’t worry, I’ll take care of it.

Fernando: Because then we’re heading to Venice.

Massimo: Fine, then you’ll leave for Venice afterwards, okay?

Fernando: Sounds good.

Massimo: So listen, this weird South African thing … Hello? We’ll record everything we say, then we’ll do a transcription and fix it up a bit, then I’ll send it to you.

Fernando: Perfect.

Massimo: I’ll send it by email even though you’re closed. Do you get email while you’re away?

Fernando: Yes, in Brotas. Could you please cc everything to Humberto and Claudio?

Massimo: No problem. So … 

Fernando: It’s hot and humid here. I see that you’re in a killer freeze!

Massimo: Ah! We’re cold and you’re hot, so let’s talk about the weather! What are we supposed to be talking about, I’m not clear on that?!

Fernando: Hahahaha … 

Massimo: They’re asking about the future of design. Do you have any idea of what the future of design is? I don’t!

Fernando: Me!? No, the future of design … 

Massimo: Hahaha! What is it?

Fernando: It’s the climate; it’s climate change … hahahaha.

Massimo: Climate change! Haha, it clearly depends on the temperature then?

Fernando: On the temperature, on how badly the planet is ruined … No, seriously.

Paesaggi Italiani sideboard for Edra by Massimo Morozzi.

Paesaggi Italiani purple modular container and sponge chair for Edra by Massimo Morozzi.

Cotto and Campana for Edra by Humberto and Fernando Campana.

Massimo: Go ahead.

Fernando: I see the future as more cinematographic, more theatrical, because we’ve absorbed everything and now we just have to provide a bit of a story. Put characters on the theatre stages of the home.

Massimo: Certainly.

Fernando: In order to change.

Massimo: Hey, Fernando, when they called me from South Africa, I remembered that time when we were on a helicopter. Do you remember?

Fernando: HAHAHAHA!

Massimo: And we were about to die? WE WERE ABOUT TO DIE! HAHAHA!

Fernando: … hahaha … What a catastrophe for the design world.

Massimo: It was a catastrophe!

Fernando: … HAHAHA … 

Massimo: Okay, for the South Africans reading this, I’ll summarise the story: we climbed aboard a helicopter for a scenic flight over the Cape, and the pilot was a blonde woman. She started the engine and it started thrumming, vum vum vum, until at a certain point a yellow light came on and began beeping.

Fernando: Good thing we were still on the ground!

Massimo: And the girl said, “Sorry, it doesn’t work!” Doesn’t work? Shit, are you kidding me?

Fernando: Good thing that this “beep beep beep” happened on the ground and not over the Cape of Good Hope.

Massimo: We’re worrying about the future of design, and they were practically about to kill us!

Fernando: Imagine this “beep beep beep” over the ocean, like a flashing light going “Shit shit shit!”

Massimo: Hahaha! “IT IT IT” and she shakes her head, “Sorry, it doesn’t work”. Now you’re telling me!? Anyway, listen I like this idea of the cinematographic dimension. I’ve always said that design is a sort of fiction, at least the way we experience it. They’re stories that narrate something. All of the projects we’ve done together have stories behind them, no?

Fernando: They’re a dramatic script in both presentation and material, very powerful.

Massimo: Absolutely. I’m thinking of the story of the crocodiles, of the Pantanal, of these horrors that … 

Fernando: I wanted to be an actor, and this makes me think that my furniture is a procession of all the characters that I never played because I didn’t have the talent to be an actor.

Massimo: Fernando, you made a mistake – what a shame, we probably lost a great thespian. But instead there emerged this curious approach to design based on stories. Remember the story of the precious stones of Brasilia?

Fernando: Yes.

Massimo: We spent so much time on that, but then it seems to me a great thing because in the end, all these things are transformed into concrete objects that people can touch, cohabit with. This is important.

Fernando: It is.

Massimo: We’re talking about thousands of kilometres of distance. Everything’s digital here, it’s all fake.

Fernando: It’s all digital, which makes me feel strange.

Massimo: Hehehe.

Fernando: But you said something earlier about how people, when they see these stories, this theatre script that we create, they continue to recount them. For example, this new barbarism. In Paris, I’m hearing people refer to Cabana as a barbarian.

Massimo: This stuff about barbarism has stirred up a lot of talk. It’s interesting to everyone, makes them curious, and these are the keywords, the forces that launch an object, that invite people to think and, yes, to identify with the objects and recite their part.

Fernando: And to think in terms of a vocabulary that’s much more than just a sales catalogue. For example, people are referring to Cabana as barbarism, not Cabana. It’s strange, because in Paris I heard a lot of people talking about this product using the words from the catalogue, as if it were a theatre script.

Massimo: Interesting.

Fernando: … with the names of the characters, or even just their personalities.

Massimo: This is very interesting, and emerges both because there are these keywords, in this case barbarism, and also because objects like Cabana are creatures, living beings in some way, and this is very interesting.

Fernando: I was passing by Silvera on my way to the Musee D’Orsay.

Pasta set for Alessi by Massimo Morozzi.

Stalactite for Corsi Design by Humberto and Fernando Campana.

Cabana storage unit for Edra by Humberto and Fernando Campana.

Aguapé chair for Edra by Humberto and Fernando Campana.

Massimo: And?

Fernando: And I saw Cabana in the middle of Paris. I didn’t know that Silvera’s shop was there.

Massimo: Ah.

Fernando: And it almost startled me. I said to myself, what is this thing? It’s strange to see these real beings in the Parisian landscape. I wanted to put them out in the street, in a square.

Massimo: That would have been great. We’ll see if we can … 

Fernando: To create places for bicycle parking, to sell stuff, to create a little kiosk where people can stay, where they sell penguin ice-cream bars. Imagine a penguin coming from inside the Cabana, haha!

Massimo: You could make a little tribal village in the courtyard of the Louvre, with penguins exiting from the Cabanas and entering the pyramid.

Massimo: Okay. Listen, where in God’s name is Humberto?

Fernando: Humberto went out with Ana Paula for an appointment.

Massimo: Ah, so I won’t get to say hello.

Fernando: He’ll be back in an hour or two.

Massimo: Alright then.

Fernando: And I’m going out for lunch.

Massimo: Will you give him my regards? Hello?

Fernando: I can hear you, Massimo. This is very strange … 

Massimo: Maybe we’ll call to exchange holiday greetings, okay?

Leatherworks armchair for Edra by Humberto and Fernando Campana.

Aster Papposus for Edra by Humberto and Fernando Campana.

Black iron chair for Luis Calazans by Humberto and Fernando Campana.

Fernando: Okay, when he gets back this afternoon, I’ll call you. We’ll be here all afternoon; we’re in the studio until Thursday.

Massimo: Okay, I’d like to say hi to him. And to your mother as well.

Fernando: She’s doing well. When I get to Brotas I’ll tell her. You’re all so white. I can see the cold, you in the factory wearing two jackets.

Massimo: No, no, I’m exaggerating. Though it is cold, but beautiful too. There’s the sun and design, eh?

Fernando: I had to walk through four feet of water in Venice every morning to go to work at Venini. It was a nightmare, every day till noon this deep freezing water, so cold that even with the right boots your feet would freeze.

Massimo: These are the perils of design. It’s a very dangerous profession.

Fernando: In São Paolo as well, with all these changes. Yesterday there was a storm, a downpour, you can’t imagine. It took me nearly an hour to travel less than a kilometre home.

Massimo: Hmm.

Fernando: The summer storms are definitely arriving.

Massimo: So … 

Fernando: Give my best to everyone, and thanks for your wishes for my mother. Give yours mine!

Massimo: Bye.

Fernando: Bye.

===== FILE: index_split_013.html =====

Conversation: Harry Pearce and Simon Sankarayya – life experience is more important than design theory

1 February 2011

Life experience is more important than design theory for friends Simon “Sanky” Sankarayya and Harry Pearce’s work.

Simon “Sanky” Sankarayya: How we know each other is actually something that we have both talked about recently in presentations and conferences, but I think Harry may want to start. 

Harry Pearce: Well, that is passing the buck! As I remember it, we were both heading towards Goa about four years ago. We met in the lounge in Heathrow airport, didn’t know each other from Adam and immediately got into conversation. We both started that journey down to India with all sorts of issues flying around in our lives. I had just come out of a big relationship, lost my biggest client and joined Pentagram. My whole world was shifting, and suddenly I found someone else that I could have a great conversation and share the trip with. 

Sanky: It was quite serendipitous. Our agency had been going for four years and had started to get slightly bigger projects. It was one of the first big talks that I had done on behalf of AllofUs. Also my girlfriend at the time had just moved to New York to go and carry on her fashion career. So, there was a bit of turmoil going on for both of us, and I think the calmness and the sereneness of Goa made it the perfect place for us to hang out and bond. It is funny that quite often when you meet people in design, you don’t really talk about design. One thing we touched on quite a lot was that our influences are not out of a book. The things that seem to steer our work are more to do with who we are, our life experience and pushing ourselves to actually understanding. By pushing yourself in different directions, you understand things from a wider perspective. 

Harry: We have come from very different worlds on all fronts, haven’t we? Our work, social world, everything, and yet in the past three years we have ended up in different places in the world together and spent a lot of time together. We did a road trip when we were both speaking in New Zealand about a year ago. We hired a car and spent three days driving through the hills, mountains and lakes, spending our money on the worst hotels and the best food we could find.

Sanky: I think that is quite telling because it takes a bit of commitment to not just sit around checking your email, but disappear for a while on an adventure. It makes you grow much more beneficially than sitting learning about graphic design or whatever your field is. How we met and stayed friends is based on both of us understanding that there is work, but also everything else, and that it is really important to balance the two.

Harry: It comes through in the way we chase emotional work. Your work is far more animated than my work, but it is still chasing the same kind of beauty, emotions and things that move people. 

Sanky: To a certain degree, you could argue that it is easier for me because I have sound, motion, interaction and other aspects about my work that can be used to create engagement. But nonetheless your work does that very succinctly. 

Selfridges.com website by Simon Sankarayya / AllofUs.

Selfridges.com website by Simon Sankarayya / AllofUs.

Selfridges.com website by Simon Sankarayya / AllofUs.

Online identity and product interface for WGSN website by Simon Sankarayya / AllofUs.

Harry: The first time that we actually collaborated was for the London Design Festival. That installation was very poetic. It was a purely typographic reaction to some beautiful things that were done with translation between Pen 26 and writers from around the world who didn’t understand each other’s language. We turned it into a very lyrical typographic film.

Sanky: Yeah, we really looked at the content; all good design should theoretically start from the content out, rather than the other way in. That’s also how AllofUs work. My involvement with D&AD has really opened my eyes to the vast changes in how communications function today. Covering graphic design, advertising and everything in between, people are realising that they have to work collaboratively.

Harry: The creative world has to see itself as an ecosystem. The more interdependent, the more collaborative, the richer and stronger it will get. Isolating yourself is the reverse of where everything is going. Your own personal growth also benefits from sharing and nurturing ideas with other people. 

Sanky: One should approach a problem completely neutral of any perception of anything, not caring what skills set you will need to deliver it and just come up with the best idea for it. Then involve whomever you need to get that made. Like your charity stuff, which a lot of people know and admire you for – Witness, Peter Gabriel and so on – you’ve always worked with other people on that too, I assume. Is this type of work something that you feel that you have to do? 

Harry: I do, Witness keeps my balance. It is an incredible privilege to make enough money to live and spend every day, just from thinking of ideas and being involved in the creative process. Witness is my way of balancing that privilege. It is 18 years that I have been doing it and I haven’t just done the occasional poster, which is the sexy thing to do. I have actually made it part of the daily life of the team. 

Sanky: To be honest, it is probably a great PR machine for you but that is not why you do it.

Harry: No it isn’t. We are online every day doing stuff for Witness, giving them everything they need from a day-to-day graphic communication perspective.

Submission for the Haiti Poster Project by Harry Pearce / Pentagram.

Wine bottle label design by Harry Pearce / Pentagram.

Burma poster for Witness by Harry Pearce / Pentagram.

 

Infantry poster for Witness by Harry Pearce / Pentagram.

Sanky: Do you think everybody should try and bring ethical work in?

Harry: I can’t make a statement like that because it sounds like I’m telling people what to do. Integrating some kind of balance where you give back whatever you gain, it doesn’t even have to be charity, is a very healthy way to live your life. But it is your call. 

Sanky: If you weren’t a designer, would you be a failed guitarist? Would you be busking outside Pentagram?

Harry: Oh god! I would love to do that. I would love to just busk, if I had the balls to do it. But also when I was a teenager, I just wanted to bat for England.

Sanky: Did you ever actually try for a cricket team? 

Harry: Yeah, I was the school captain and went for a youth county trial. I didn’t get anywhere, but I kept playing until it hurt too much and then I stopped. 

Harry: What about you, if you weren’t doing what you are doing now, what would your dream be?

Sanky: Music is my other love. I’m an avid record collector and have DJed here and there. But I am actually quite glad that I didn’t pursue a career in it because music remains my escape from everything and I really like that. I have got friends who have gone into the music industry and become a little jaded because it is not the thing that they loved so much anymore. When I was at college I also struggled with whether I really wanted to be a designer or an artist. I ended up being a graphic designer, but I think I could probably be quite a successful failed artist! I think it would be nice to have the freedom of not having a brief, for a while at least. 

Harry: Yeah! I cannot ever manage stopping doing creative stuff of some sort every day, regardless of the commercial thing. I would just grind to a halt. I can’t imagine you stopping either. 

Sanky: I think it is a trait of most creatives that they find it very hard to sit still. 

Harry: And you will always travel and journey.

Sanky: Indeed, there are massive lessons that I have learnt through travelling, even if it’s just to have the rug pulled from underneath me. Not being able to speak the language, not knowing where I am, not knowing how to ask for this or that … That disarmament is actually really refreshing and keeps you aware of your humanity.

Harry: You have to be completely alive to be able to do it. You can’t drift when it is like that.

Sanky: It simply reminds you to engage with people and a lot of our work is about doing that. 

Harry: I am convinced that just by moving, just by walking down the street, you get unstuck. If I sit still too long, I just don’t get ideas but if I am walking, things just flood in. What about accidental stuff? Do you use accidental stuff in your work? I find so many times that something happens accidentally and turns out to be the answer. It wasn’t my logical trip that took me to the answer; it was an accident that happened on the way that opened the door. 

Sanky: We used to work with a theatre designer that shared our space and he didn’t have a computer. This was about seven or eight years ago, but he was completely computer illiterate. We used to pull him into brainstorms because he would have a completely different perspective on what we were trying to achieve. 

Harry: You break the thought patterns. It is the same thing as what you were talking about being in a foreign city. You don’t have a clue how to move around or do anything, and you have to break your pattern. 

Sanky: How would you see yourself if you were 20 years old and starting out now? 

Harry: One thing that really paid off was that I was completely lost at college. I went to Canterbury and did a degree in graphic design. Then I had a couple of external tutors who pointed out a couple of people to me – one was Duchamp and one was Cassandre. A very weird mix, even if they’re both French! One was all about the mind, and one was all about images and words. 

Sanky: You are the conduit between Cassandre and Duchamp!? 

Harry: Yeah, I channel dead people all the time! But, it made me realise that you get close to the people that count for you. I didn’t ever go and look to be friends with Alan Fletcher, but when people like that come into your world, you either connect with that or it passes you by. I think recognising when your guides come, no matter what age you are, is really vital.

Sanky: That’s really pertinent; you’ve stayed pretty committed to the people and the things that you feel are important to you. There are a lot of people whose careers have gone from film to advertising to product ... But you’ve stayed true to the things that you started from. The scale of what you do is just a thousand times bigger. Curiously, I have done the same kind of thing, always on the creative and visual side of interaction design. If I was a lot younger I might try out a lot of things and see what fitted. But I think there is a time to play and there is a real time for commitment.

Interactive exhibits for the Who Am I? Gallery at the Science Museum by Simon Sankarayya / AllofUs.

Interactive exhibits for the Who Am I? Gallery at the Science Museum by Simon Sankarayya / AllofUs.

Interactive exhibits for the Who Am I? Gallery at the Science Museum by Simon Sankarayya / AllofUs.

Harry: How is it going with the D&AD? 

Sanky: It is amazing. It is busy. Every Wednesday I go down to their offices in Vauxhall because it means that the studio doesn’t phone me then and D&AD don’t phone me when I’m not there. I actually cut the two things off, which is the only way that I feel that I can deal with it. It has also opened my eyes, as they are a non-profit organisation. All the money that they make from the awards goes back into educational programmes that range from younger audiences in schools to professionals. They pretty much support you all the way through your career in some shape or form. 

Harry: Is it a shock? Is it keeping you awake at night?

Sanky: It is kind of scary. A lot of people have asked me: “What you are going to do?” Then I realised that the question should be: “Where can I be of most use?” This turns it into a type of design job rather than just a freethinking “What do I want to do?” The most difficult thing is that you are tongue-tied a bit as you can’t say what you are trying to do, because when half of that doesn’t emerge, you just look stupid.

Harry: You are learning another set of politics being a public figure, aren’t you?

Sanky: It gives you an insight into the industry that you would never ever get otherwise and, in that sense, is quite a challenge to take on board. It is one of those things that you just go: “God I’d love to do that” – once you can speak after the initial surprise. You are probably only going to be asked once in your life so you might well as do it. 

Harry: It is like Design Indaba, you only get asked once don’t you?

26 Exchanges exhibition for London Design Festival 2009 by Simon Sankarayya and Harry Pearce.

Conundrums collection of typographic puzzles by Harry Pearce / Pentagram.

Posters for the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime by Harry Pearce / Pentagram.

===== FILE: index_split_014.html =====

Conversation: Heath Nash and Hella Jongerius on craft in a contemporary context

1 February 2011

From the icy global hub of Berlin in Germany and the sunny backwaters of Coffee Bay in South Africa, Hella Jongerius and Heath Nash met on Skype.

Heath Nash: The past six years for me have been an exploration of re-use. I am also really interested in different types of craft, and bringing craft into a more contemporary and relevant state for contemporary consumers. Also, by using a process of exploration in my work, I tend to try things out and see what happens, rather than knowing what I want to do before I start. And you?

Hella Jongerius: It is so difficult to do the elevator pitch about your past ten years. I’m only interested in crafts in an industrial context. I have been working in this space for the past ten years, and have been developing a language of individual science that comes out of crafts and archives. Heath, why do you only do lighting?

Heath: It is just what I have started with. I have lots of other interests and want to do other products, but it hasn’t really happened yet. This year I have been focusing a lot on mastering the business aspects of my studio, because previously I had absolutely no business knowledge. I have been getting tools together so that I can manage the business properly and also start to extricate myself from the running of the business, so that I can focus on other projects that I can really throw my creativity at.

Hella: I know that lights are easier to make your money with, because it is a simpler product to make and it is also a product that all consumers need a few of. 

Heath: I am also interested in working with traditional craft techniques. I am currently in Coffee Bay in the Eastern Cape, where I’m going to be working with some weavers. I am keen to start exploring larger objects and furniture with these new artisanal techniques that I am learning to work with. 

Hella: Like the project in Zimbabwe?

Heath: Yes, that was last year. It was an amazing, exciting process. It made me see that the people that I was working with are almost like human machines, because they are so good at what they do. 

Hella: I also did something with local crafts. I did a project with students in Brazil and a project for Ikea with women in India. 

Heath: Yes, those beautiful wall hangings with animals!

Hella: Yes. Working with craft people, the products always look beautiful because it mostly comes from traditions and people are very skilled. It is a pleasure to work in that way, but the difficulty is the logistics and the marketing afterwards. It is very difficult because you have small quantities, and the distribution is quite hard and expensive. You need a powerful company to get the products to fly.

Craft workshop in Zimbabwe. Courtesy of Heath Nash.

Craft workshop in Zimbabwe. Courtesy of Heath Nash.

Heath: Exactly, that is what I have also found and I don’t know how it is going to be overcome because it is the biggest problem. I am interested in the business side of your studio. How did you learn those skills? Are you involved in the logistics? It is very complicated stuff and you have so many products in the making all the time. 

Hella: Well, I think I was born with some.

Heath: You are lucky!

Hella: My father is an entrepreneur, so I have it in my blood. It’s easy for me to run a studio. The companies I work with take care of the production, marketing and selling of the products that we develop together, so the whole business part. I receive royalties if I do a good job. 

Heath: In South Africa there aren’t companies like that.

Hella: But don’t you have an agreement with Artecnica?

Heath: Oh yes, I do. 

Hella: Artecnica is a businessman or agent who takes care of the product. So you hire your craft people or they have craft people all over the world, and they sell it for you. Not only do they sell it for you, but they do the packaging and the very important part of making a product a success. The company is a very nice company to work for. 

Heath: What did you do with Artecnica?

Hella: I made bowls and black plates with beads on it. I did not work with the craft people myself because it was in a dangerous drug district. We did it all by post, Fedex, email and whatever, and there was quite a lot of to-and-fro but in the end it all worked out. It was a nice experience.

Heath: I long for the restrictions that come with working for a client and having them produce for you. If you work with a Vitra or Ikea, they give you certain parameters that you have to work within and I think that is quite exciting, because you know where the boundaries are. If everything is self-produced, there is too much option out there and so it becomes more difficult in a way. 

Hella: That is true. Within boundaries you need your creativity because you know where you are headed and how small your pocket is.

Jonsberg Vases for Ikea by Hella Jongerius.

Knitted Lamp for Droog Design and Delft University of Technology by Hella Jongerius. Photo by Gerrit Schreurs.

Anemone for Artecnica by Heath Nash.

Heath: Price is very important. Artecnica produced one of my lamps called the Anemone, but it was so difficult to make that it ended up being too expensive. It is in production, but it doesn’t sell very much. I do have a few other simpler ideas that I would like to do with them, but they haven’t come to fruition yet. I love how you think about sales being the ends, that the product proves to be successful once it sells enough. 

Hella: I think it is part of your duty in the end to develop products that are a success on all levels and that there is somebody that is willing to pay that amount for the product. You are not an artist, you are a designer, so you work for a consumer market.

Heath: What are you working on at the moment, Hella?

Hella: I just finished an exhibition that I did in Holland to show the past 15 years of my work and there is a book called Misfit, published by Phaidon. That has really kept me busy for the past six months. I moved to Berlin two years ago and changed from working with a studio, to working alone again. I still design new products for companies, but I use freelancers that I have worked with for a long time to help me. By being alone, I wanted to concentrate more on abstract subjects, not just doing chairs and things, but more research and experiments. Now I can just wander around in subjects. I have been doing a lot of work and research around “colour”.

Heath: That sounds very, very nice. 

Hella: That I am able to do this, is a luxury of my success. I could have grown and had a big studio with a lot of people, but I wanted to use the money that I gained to take the time to explore the depths of my profession.

Heath: What is your opinion on the differences between art and design? What you are describing seems to be my idea of an artist’s existence. 

Hella: I think that an artist makes different projects to a designer, which have nothing to do with whether you are alone or in a team. A designer works for a market, so a product has to function in a normal environment, also price wise. Dealing with industry is a big part of being a designer. So, there is a difference for me although it is also fluid. 

Heath: I can’t help wondering what your reflection and research is going to lead to. Would you be open to making art? 

Hella: No. The work I have been doing is about industrial production. What has been lost in products since the industrial revolution – there’s a lot wrong. I design individual products produced in series, showing the hand of the maker, with interesting details and celebrating imperfection. This is a rethink of quality! That’s the reason why I now work in colours. I miss a colour world that is no longer there – the industrial recipes are very poor because of standardisation. I’m researching colour from a design perspective.

Heath: Was it colour specifically in relation to one material or is it across the board that you are researching? 

Hella: It is not one material, it is really researching industrial recipes for colours in which the pigments are poor and mixed economically. In research, you look at alternatives. Considering the kind of work that I see in paintwork in art, why has this been lost to the industrial world? The industrial tests are killing the quality. There’s a test that says that a colour has to be the same in the morning as in the evening. I think that changing with the light is the beauty of a colour – that’s quality! We as designers have to work with this poor industrial sterilisation of the system. 

Heath: In a way you are designing colour? 

Hella: Yes. Not in terms of trend watching, but in terms of wanting to have a richer colour. For the exhibition, I made 15 very nice colourful blacks. A world that you cannot buy in industrial pigments. 

Heath: That could help many other designers with the work that they make as well. 

Hella: Yes, that is the idea. 

Bottleformball Lamp from Other People’s Rubbish range by Heath Nash.

Misfit exhibition at the Museum Boijmans van Beuningen by Hella Jongerius. Photo by Lotte Stekelenburg.

Coloured Vases (Series 3: Blues) by Hella Jongerius. Photo by Gerrit Schreurs.

Long Neck Groove Bottles by Hella Jongerius. Photo by Gerrit Schreurs.

Heath: I am very envious of the Dutch way of thinking and of Dutch design schools. I am amazed at all the work that comes out of Eindhoven and am very respectful of how the people of your country think about design. As designers, we are thinkers. Why I like working with artisans in South Africa is that while they have production systems and they make very nice things, they don’t think beyond making the same thing. What I was doing in Zimbabwe and what I would like to do here in Coffee Bay is to start working with these artisans and to start introducing them to ways of thinking about innovation instead of just production. I think that if that can be taught and shared with these communities that are struggling, then at least it gives them a way to work forward both in their design and in their lives. 

Hella: I think that innovation is very important and I think that innovation is a very important word if you are a designer. If you don’t innovate in your profession or if you don’t innovate in making a new chair or in a new method, I think that it is no longer interesting. Innovation is not only important in our profession. Besides the best Dutch design, I think that there is also a lot of rubbish, but the good designer questions the profession. This is something that you could do: Questioning the profession and trying to come up with an alternative world.

Heath: This whole thing of re-use that I am interested in is questioning the world and how things look already. Why does the packaging design look the way it looks? Why does a bottle look like a bottle? I think there is no need for a bottle to be bottle-shaped. I’d like to ask plastics producers whether there can’t be more to a bottle than simply carrying your bleach home? Whether one can build a second function into the structure of what we take for granted now. However, I struggle to speak to industry and get them to understand what I can offer. Something that really interested me about your earlier work is that it was self-initiated and then taken up by industry. I don’t know if you have an easy answer for this, but how did you make that crossover?

Hella: I always say that this takes eight years of showing what you can do. Everyone can see what you are doing and if they call you, they know what they get. I think that is very important. They need to know what your handwriting and opinions are, companies want to be safe. Then on a certain day a phone call will come and people will want something from you. I think that it is just a matter of patience and determination with what you are doing, because you know you are doing a good job. 

Heath: Then I’ve still got a while to go as I only started in 2004!

===== FILE: index_split_015.html =====

Conversation: Fernando Gutiérrez and Ross Lovegrove on ways of working

1 February 2011

Long-time friends Ross Lovegrove and Fernando Gutiérrez look past the obvious difference in dimension of each other’s work.

Matallana wine bottle label with Alan Kitchin by Fernando Gutiérrez.

Ross Lovegrove: You and I have stayed really good friends, because intellectually there is a lot that we share. If I want to see an exhibition with somebody, I’ll always call Fernando because we have a very good level of discussion and a mutual curiosity. Personally I have great respect for what you do. You know your art form very well and refuse to be shaken or stirred – James Bond terminology – by others and movements. You are aware, but you stay true and just keep refining what you do. Would that be fair to say in terms of your own path?

Fernando Gutiérrez: Yeah. It all began for me with magazines. Magazines are incredible social tools. The magazines that I worked on were all related to entertainment and the arts. I’ve continued working in that world.

Ross: Do you see the magazines and the other work you do, the books especially, as an art form?

Fernando: Yes. Magazines and books, if they’re done beautifully and the subject is going to last forever.

Ross: On sale at Christie’s there was an edition of Interview magazine in an acrylic box with Andy Warhol on the cover, drawings by Antony Gormley and Tibor Kalman inside. So there is this idea of the historical and social value of magazines. Do you see it in that way? Like when you were the art director of Colors, that was a very powerful tool at a very powerful time. But also a hard act to follow on from Tibor Kalman and Oliviero Toscani?

Fernando: I just wanted it to continue. It was an incredibly romantic project, of that moment and right for that moment. It still used very traditional ways of communicating – it was photographs on paper. But the visual language was still interesting and quite different. Now it’s a lot easier to do things in real time, which is a whole new way of communicating. I’m very traditional in that way – I still believe in the book and the magazine.

Tiziano exhibition banner for Prado Museum in Barcelona, Spain. Courtesy of Fern.

 

 

Manet exhibition billboard for Prado Museum in Barcelona, Spain by Fernando Gutiérrez.

Ross: Yesterday was the first time ever that I didn’t present a project to a client. I emailed it, which is outrageous for me, I always sit with a client. But I was ill, so I couldn’t do it and he said email it. Ugh. I didn’t get the chance to really explain the surrounding context of what I’d designed. Do you think the electronic medium has taken some of that mystery away or do people expect more from you?

Fernando: It depends on the way you’ve developed. I prefer, and that’s a good reminder, to always meet the person and be close. Because that’s the way I’ve always worked. The emailing side of things I just find too cold. I find it detached.

Ross: Don’t you think that some things appear, and through a sort of global consciousness, become inevitable. When in fact no one has really been asked whether they like that change, it’s just an inevitability. So what you have in publishing for example, is this paranoia that unless they go electronic, they’re going to lose out. It sort of accelerates the death, if you like, of the old medium.

Fernando: What the old medium needs is just a transformation. We’ve got to take the sensitivity of the old medium into the electronic. And right now that’s quite complicated because the digital is all programming and stuff, and things just get designed by default. The sensitivity, I feel, is not there.

Ross: But it’s lost all tactility. I don’t want to get too romantic again but the whole physicality, from paper weight to quality of colour refinement.

Fernando: But even in terms of the content – take an interview for instance. Instead of a series of photographs, which is a very personal interaction between the photographer and the person being interviewed, now the whole interview is filmed to be displayed well on iPads and other new technolology.

Cosmic Leaf lamp for Artemide by Ross Lovegrove.

Ross: Those tools can also be incredibly seductive. This is a golden age for people like me to be able to really show my capabilities, whereas in the past it came down to the gift of drawing or illustration, which is so old fashioned and very slow. Those drawings and sketches have been replaced in the public domain by computer imagery. A studio like mine, which is a very high-level state-of-the-art studio, is expected to deliver everything at that level. But what I try to do, what I pride myself on, is that the object that you see will always be better than the computer image – because of what you just said about graphic design and the fact that there still needs to be some tactile element. Like the staircase that I just did, you’ll never be able to understand the colour and the crispness on a computer screen. It’s the physical act of being with it. Like being with an animal or meeting someone famous that you’ve only ever seen on television, when you see them in reality, there’s another aura.

Fernando: I’ve seen how your work has evolved over the years. I like that you’ve always looked towards the future. It’s looking at how your objects fit into an improved lifestyle. It’s making us think about our environment and how our world functions. Over the years, you’ve gotten more and more into this vision of the future that connects to now. I think it’s very interesting, the materials that you introduce, and the form and shapes of some everyday objects, some not so everyday. I can feel how it’s transforming, how a little object can become very very large.

Ross: I had a fantastic discussion yesterday with Konstantin Grcic about Black, his series of exhibitions. He loves the power of black and the opposite of nature, meaning the brutal nature of industry as an artificial force as opposed to copying a pebble on a beach. People perceive me as doing white and him as doing black. But actually, I do quite a few things in black. That’s why I sort of understand Konstantin’s approach. I understand it very well, I just don’t do it.

Fernando: It’s interesting that he puts out exhibitions that are not about his work, but more of a debate. He’s provoking debate.

Ross: Unless there’s enough debate, you’re never going to come up with some sort of treatise of observation that can ever move anything. At 50, we’re not young or old, and we can reflect back and also look forward.

Fernando: It’s a great age, a great moment, a crossroads in our work. I think I’m a bit younger than you but in technology terms, when I started working, there were no computers. So we are of the same generation. When we began, we had to do it ourselves or we worked with people that no longer exist anymore.

Ross: Now today, anybody in any country with visualisation skills and a laptop can just put this stuff onto the internet. It’s so disposable, it’s incredible.

Fernando: The industry is bigger than ever. There are more schools than ever, there are more books being published on design than ever. It’s a huge business. I think there will be a lot more people interested in design and buying design because more people have been educated about it. What I like to think is that these people won’t necessarily become designers, but will have a sensitivity towards design and know to use design in business and culture. Otherwise, the jobs just aren’t there. You can’t just go off and set up your own studio – you’ll get eaten up. Running a business in design is very hard.

 

Exhibition graphics for Van Doesburg exhibition at the Tate Modern by Fernando Gutiérrez.

 

Exhibition graphics for Van Doesburg exhibition at the Tate Modern by Fernando Gutiérrez.

Ross: People often say to me that design seems easy to me, like it’s effortless. Well it might appear effortless, but that’s only because I’m not speaking. But my mind is constantly questioning what I do because I’m a hard taskmaster and you’re supposed to get more and more relevant, to get better at what you do. I went to an incredible lecture the other day by Patrik Schumacher, the partner of Zaha Hadid. It was a new manifesto on architecture, a Le Cobusier-esque treatise, “Towards a New Architecture” type of thing. He said that with the onslaught of computing ability and the way that young people have grabbed onto this tool, especially in architecture, a new process has evolved called parametrics. Basically what you do is the computer runs, like flapping a sheet in the wind and freezing it. Then the computer gives you the data to manufacture what you see from the materials. So I’m interested in relevance and the time in which I live, but I can see that there’s going to be an explosion of biodiversity because there’s just so many people designing.

Fernando: But what about the role of the client? For me, it’s very important to have someone who comes and asks you to do something. They challenge you. Propose to do something that is going to be groundbreaking.

Ross: They are few and far between. I don’t have many clients like that. I mean, I just had a meeting about doing an electric vehicle and I knew more than the CEO of the company.

Fernando: Because the idea of a good client is that he is smarter than you.

Ross: You don’t need the client.

Fernando: With the client it is also the dialogue around improving and making an idea and putting it out there. You need someone that’s brave. You and the client have to be brave. The client has to have a vision.

Ross: Most of the time there isn’t the time anymore to sit down with your clients in a pair of jeans socially and talk about, for instance, the use of water in bathing culture and sanitation. Just water, not a product. Because this is a higher philosophical position, it’s about water preservation, use and management, as opposed to style. It’s content over style that I’m after. It would be wonderful to reinstate the old model – slow it down a bit – and still be able to survive. And then to have more of a direct dialogue with a handful of really wonderful, innovative clients and grow with them.

Fernando: That is the old way of working. But the beauty of technology now is that you just don’t need as many people as before. Even with filmmaking, you really don’t need such a big team anymore. One could do a newspaper with a really small team and cover the whole world.

Ross:
You could start a newspaper. Doesn’t matter what the distribution is. What’s next for you – any dreams, any big objectives?

Fernando: In the principality of Asturias, a region of Spain, I’ve been helping to develop a cultural programme as well as the TV station for their local region. I find that very interesting. Another project is in the capital of Spain, Madrid, working on the main classical museum. Both of these things, they’re not directly about design, although that’s important for me in the project. They’re more about helping them to get people to interact with the product, which in this case is culture, and give them something to inspire them.

Ross: I like the way that you approach things like that, there’s enough slap in the face.

“Can a Lily Grow a Telephone” limited-edition artwork by Ross Lovegrove.

Catalogues for LABoral Centro de Arte in Gijon, Spain by Fernando Gutiérrez.

Fernando: Is there anything you wish you had designed? What’s your dream?

Ross: I don’t get up in the morning thinking I wish I’d designed those cufflinks. That doesn’t interest me at all. But a car … It’s because I see the car as a large product, I don’t see it as a car. I see it as both the icon of our civilisation or civilising abilities, and our demise. It’s an icon of pollution, but it’s also an icon of liberty and freedom. So to crack that one in my lifetime! I will also definitely work on another space programme. I’m interested in transportation at the moment – moving people: moving their soul and sensuality but also physically moving people. I want to grow as an artistic mind, a philosophical artistic mind and I will continue as the designer in whichever way that light falls on me. I’d like to keep the integrity to grow that way. My real soul doesn’t have to justify things through function or marketing, it’s really more earthy and primitive than that. My mind is in a deep past in order to create a deep future. It might not be understandable for people, but it will be. And you?

Fernando: For me it’s helping to develop and promote good ideas. Essentially giving good ideas the right help. Whatever those good ideas could be. It could be a magazine, a newspaper … I mean I’m very interested in what I said about this regional government, helping them communicate a series of cultural ideas to their public. It could extend to a whole country. However, there’s a political side that has no appeal and to get things off the ground, you do need good politicians that can help.

Ross: That’s it though – you want to step it up. Not because your ego gets bigger. It’s actually the fact that you can effect more, communicate more to people with a broader idea. It’s really tough some days to get up and think that I have to work on a door handle. I can. But I don’t think it’s a significant enough use of one’s experience. So you’re only as good as your client.

 

Ridon limited-edition carbon fibre motorcycle by Ross Lovegrove.

 

Ridon limited-edition carbon fibre motorcycle by Ross Lovegrove.

Ridon limited-edition carbon fibre motorcycle by Ross Lovegrove.

===== FILE: index_split_016.html =====

Conversation: René Redzepi and Marije Vogelzang – food connects to everything

16 November 2011

Marije Vogelzang chats to René Redzepi of Noma Restaurant about MAD Foodcamp, creativity, intuition, fingers, social media and being part of the future.

Cover of Noma: Time and Place in Nordic Cuisine by René Redzepi. Courtesy of Phaidon Press.

Marije Vogelzang: I’m sure you must be extremely busy?

René Redzepi: I am. I never expected that the more success you have the more work you get, but I’ve discovered that it’s actually true. On the other hand, I also give myself a lot of work, for instance the MAD Foodcamp and Symposium.

Marije: I think it was a wonderful event. I really liked the roughness of it.

René: That was the whole point; it had to feel completely transparent. I wanted no pretentiousness, everything had to be focussed on the people, and be about the food, animals and ingredients. We spent all our energy and money on getting that organised.

Marije: It felt to me like such a natural extension of your ideology and I wonder if you would feel more comfortable working outside the setting of a restaurant?

René: To set a completely new challenge was very necessary for me. It’s a technique that I use a lot for things. Sometimes I do it in simple ways at the restaurant too. But a festival and symposium is something I have never been part of. I had to think not so much as a restaurant chef but a food person, somebody that knows about food. Did you have a chance to go to the symposium?

Marije: I didn’t catch it all because I was doing the Veggie Bling Bling Workshop but I have seen some things on the internet.

René: Okay good, because it was a mega success. I’ve attended tons of these things around the world, some very academic, some very focussed on the latest creations and blah blah. But the whole spirit of this was that chefs should learn new knowledge and take part in the world around them. I was so surprised how well the chefs took it. They started to understand that the more they know about the history of food, the culture that’s behind it and the latest new science, the better they will cook.

Marije: I think it is the beginning of a new era where everybody is relating to food. Even designers who never worked with food before have started thinking about and working with food because it connects to everything. It connects everybody and connects the whole system.

René: It’s true. One chef sitting there was saying: “Wow, so this means that if I change the way that I source my ingredients then I can actually help people get food in another part of the world?” It still surprises me, but the combination of all of us doing it can create a big change and that is just amazing.

I think people want this new knowledge. We go to school and learn a lot of things but we don’t learn about the implications of various types of agriculture. Some chefs argue that what we cook for is just flavour and the rest doesn’t matter, like it doesn’t matter how the food is made. But it is more than that.

Winter cabbage and winter oysters from Noma: Time and Place in Nordic Cuisine (Phaidon Press). Photo by Ditte Isager.

Vegetable field from Noma: Time and Place in Nordic Cuisine (Phaidon Press). Photo by Ditte Isager.

Scallops with sea urchins, sea buckthorn and miukko from Noma: Time and Place in Nordic Cuisine (Phaidon Press). Photo by Ditte Isager.

Pork neck with bulrushes, violets and malt from Noma: Time and Place in Nordic Cuisine (Phaidon Press). Photo by Ditte Isager.

Blueberries surrounded by their natural environment from Noma: Time and Place in Nordic Cuisine (Phaidon Press). Photo by Ditte Isager.

Marije: So are you going to continue with this?

René: Let’s see. It’s all about money, of course. To tell the truth, we don’t want any large-scale food sponsors like food production companies. Our dream and intention is that we do it every year, and that every year we come closer and closer to this big outdoor festival where people eat and sleep, and where in the evening you can have open air movies, like relevant documentaries and shows about food.

Marije: Can you imagine incorporating a larger crossover of designers or creative thinkers, together with chefs and food people?

René: Most definitely. Every year will have a different topic. One year a theme could be something like that. Design and food go hand in hand. It’s important because you need a way to sell your ingredient, product, readymade sauce or whatever. 

But also, many of the high-profile chefs are inspired by design and architecture. The way that food is being looked at now is not that different from, let’s say, the general way of looking at design: straight to the point, unpretentious, very practical, and a focus on quality and clarity of materials. In many ways, that is starting to happen in food as well.

Marije: When I hear you talk about MAD Foodcamp and your excitement about its amazing connection between nature, society, education, flavour and ingredients, I wonder if you don’t feel restricted working within the setting of the restaurant? I ask this because I had a restaurant that I sold last week, because I felt really restricted by the repetitiveness of trying to have the same quality over and over again.

René: I think all restaurants and all chefs have that issue. You have this moment where everything is right, all your thoughts are new, and they create new pillars for your way of cooking and organising a team. When you have success through that you start stressing more and being less creative. I think your brain starts to become hollow because you start focussing on success. So, how do you keep yourself inspired, how do you not switch to autopilot?

Marije: Yeah, do you still feel light?

René: I know at one point that I am going to run into this. Then it will be time for me to leave the restaurant and pass on the work to somebody who can see things with a new light and a breath of fresh air. Maybe that will never happen. Maybe I will find some way to reboot constantly. As for right now, I am still filled with inspiration, I must say.

Marije: I can imagine you can still find a way that brings the restaurant guests into nature.

René: Maybe the future lies in that somewhere. But right now the restaurant theme still lies in developing the flavour. I don’t know what that sum is of all the people we are, all the ingredients we have, the culture, the history, the religion… What is the sum of all these things together on a plate? I’m still exploring that in strange and weird ways. I’m not finished; I still have a lot of energy and feel like a child searching.

Marije: It’s nice to hear that you still feel like a child and can still feel light, because I think you’re some kind of poet.

René: [laughs] I think it is important, otherwise it doesn’t make any sense to work as much as I do. I would never work as much as I do just to generate profit. It’s because it is about shaping a point of view that matters, which is very gratifying. And then I just love the fact that you’re learning constantly. That has to be my life ambition, to keep learning and teaching.

Marije: Have you ever thought about medicinal food? Do you think about the affect that the food has on your guests?

René: This is not something intentional, but a lot of people mention that their body feels great and that when they wake up in the morning, their body doesn’t have this heavy feeling. But I wouldn’t put in a specific seed just because I know that it is good for cancer or something like that, even though I’ve studied a lot of those things as a lot of the plants and the wild foods that we use are medicinal.

Marije: I did notice that at the end of the dinner, even though I’d eaten so much, I really felt very light still.

René: It’s true, even though you had about 20 dishes. I do think about things like being a human being and what our bodies process. What lives well in the stomach? What is the flavour and where are all the diverse mouth feelings? How do you end off a meal with a stomach that is balanced? So that your mind, taste buds and intellect have been challenged? So that you’re satisfied and that you’ve learnt new things, but that your stomach is also balanced? I think about that in a subconscious way. As a person that deals with food and works with taste all the time, you just do whatever feels right. You know what I mean?

Marije: Yes, it is something that you do intuitively.

You know, I was so happy to eat with my hands because suddenly you already taste the food before putting it in your mouth, by tasting it with your fingertips. Do you want to push this more in the future? Could you imagine going beyond the plate or beyond the table?

René: Absolutely. I’ve found people actually quite enjoy it. Most of them are, unlike you, provoked by it. They think they’ve paid all this money and are then asked to eat with their fingers, but then they do it and realise it comes so naturally. It awakens something in them. Of course there are those other people who just think it’s funny and completely takes the pretence out of dining. Somehow though, it breaks down all barriers once you’ve seen the person in front of you put their fingers in their mouth.

It’s like when you go to Finland. You land at the airport and two hours later you’re in the sauna with a bunch of naked men. Then two hours later you’re in a meeting room with these men, but you see them differently because you’ve just seen them naked. It’s the same when you see businessmen in front of each other eating with their fingers, looking awkward and nervous. It’s fabulous. It creates a looser, lighter mood.

Marije: Yeah, it’s really great to see people’s responses. I’m working at the moment on a project in Budapest where I’m going to have gypsy women feed you with their hands. I’m really scared because it’s quite a thing whether you want to be fed by someone that you do not know. I’m making an installation where you can’t have eye contact with each other and I think that will make it better.

René: Wow! Just the fact that I’m being fed by someone that I don’t know, that’s really crossing some boundaries. I mean, have they washed their fingers, what do they have on them? Also, it’s in Budapest and putting an extra stamp on that it’s a gypsy! In many societies that is the lowest you can get in terms of mankind … That’s crazy.

Marije: They will wash their hands in front of you. But it is very much on the edge, I agree. The women will tell you their life stories using food as a way to create understanding.

But I was wondering if you had to design an object that was non-edible, would you approach it in the same way you approach food?

René: We do design serving objects constantly. We have done this type of plate for serving oysters. We take a lot of rocks from where the oysters are found and create a setting for the oyster. In that sense, it is not a dish, but an object. These are the kinds of objects we do. Also like the pieces of wood with the flowers in the vase and the felt plates that you experienced.

Marije: I liked those. Do you think that social media is something that will change the future of chefs or food?

René: For us it’s like a newsletter. Instead of writing long newsletters once a month, it’s a constantly updated feed of what’s happening.

Marije: I was just thinking that for farmers, social media could help them connect with each other and the public.

René: It would be amazing because a lot of these farmers have no idea how to sell their products.

Marije: There are also these apps with maps of cities where people show where you can find free food in the city or in the wild.

René: There are apps that do that?

Marije: Yeah. Maybe you can start one for Denmark.

René: Another idea I have is for a company where people create contact with chefs for the farmers and contacts with farmers for the chefs. Or be the middleman: going to chefs and asking what they want, what they are missing and then finding it for them, and vice versa.

Marije: It could be a website too.

René: Yeah, where farmers would log on and say they have carrots coming into season, and chefs would see what they could get and start a conversation.

Marije: Do you think that there’s a way to incorporate normal people, beyond the chefs?

René: It could be for normal people as well. But the best thing for that is small farmer markets, in many areas of each city. It brings such a special soul and life.

Marije: Do you think that regular, non-foodie people go to markets? There are a lot of people that don’t take time for food and just buy fast things at supermarkets. Is there a way to get these people to go to real markets again?

René: The problem is that there are very few real markets. If there were more markets it would be easier to get people to buy and cook better food. People would be able to talk about the ingredients, why perhaps they are more expensive, what the benefits are of that specific ingredient and also about how to cook it.

That’s a big thing. When you’re at the supermarket and stare at a piece of red cabbage, you wonder, what you are going to do with it? I don’t have time to go home and look through 15 cookbooks. Then you ask the guy who is in charge of the green crops and he says he doesn’t know, he eats pizza every night.

Marije: [laughs] Yeah.

René: People that grow food also cook food. They know how to cook it. Because they cook what they grow, there is a whole different interaction that is better.

Marije: Do you think you will be an active part of that future?

René: Well I always thought that I wouldn’t have the time and so on. But if I think about it from my chef perspective, then I hope my sous chefs, and all the people that are eating right now in my restaurant, go out to open their own restaurants and spread the message of good food. They’re like family.

Marije: I think with the position that you have right now, you will radiate that to the rest of the world and inspire people. So you will have an influence on it whether you want it or not.

===== FILE: index_split_017.html =====

Conversation: Paola Antonelli and Marion Nestle – designing food education and regulation

16 November 11

Paola Antonelli and Marion Nestle discuss the problems with the current food system and how creatives are interpreting this.

Paola Antonelli: For the past ten years I have been working on a book project, which now might become an exhibition, about basic food units from all over the world, considered as examples of design. Since it was my own project and not for MoMA, I’ve been postponing and postponing, although I have done all the research. Now I am proposing it to MoMA as a show, so that I’ll finally do it!

Marion Nestle: It’s the right time for it because everybody is doing food.

Paola: You’ve been doing food for a much longer time. How did you get to food as the focus of your work?

Marion: I’ve always loved to eat and I was introduced to real food at a summer camp when I was eight years old. I was sent off to this camp in Vermont where they had a garden and a wonderful cook. The cook would send the kids out to the garden to pick the food. Once you’ve eaten freshly picked vegetables, you can’t go back.

When it came time to go to university I wanted to study food but it wasn’t possible. You had two choices. You could study agriculture, but I’m a city girl. The other possibility was dietetics. I went to university as a dietetics major and lasted exactly one day.

Paola: One day! I thought you were about to say one year. Why, what happened?

Marion: Well, I went to the first class and thought: “This is silly, I’m not going to do this.”

Paola: Good for you. It took me two years to leave economics.

Marion: Ah yes, economics. I regret not knowing agricultural economics, which would be helpful.

But so, I left it and did science. I did my doctorate in molecular biology. I ended up teaching cell and molecular biology, which was very abstract although very aesthetic. In my department at Brandeis in Massachusetts there was a rule that you could only teach the same class for three years. Then you had to stop and teach something else, whether you knew anything about it or not, because the idea was that you would always be learning, changing, and keeping the teaching fresh. When it was my turn to do a new course, the students wanted a nutrition course and it was handed to me to teach. It was like falling in love; I never looked back. In that first class I established the way that I would be thinking and teaching about food and nutrition ever since. It’s now been almost 40 years.

After that I went to the medical school in San Francisco (UCSF) where I taught nutrition to medical students for ten years. In between I did a Master’s in public health nutrition that linked what I was doing to social questions. By the time I went to Washington to work on government policy for a couple of years, I knew basic nutrition, clinical nutrition and public health nutrition. After two years learning nutrition policy, I went to New York University.

 

“Foragers” by Dunne & Raby, shown as part of the Between Reality and the Impossible exhibition at the 2010 St Etienne Design Biennale. Based on the original “Designs for an Overpopulated Planet: Foragers 2009” concept developed for Design Indaba’s Protofarm 2050 project. Photos by Jason Evans.

 

Paola: I think there are few things in the world that can condense as much as food. You can approach it in so many different ways. It can be art. It can be literature. It can be policymaking.

Marion: It can be biology. I knew right from the first day that this was the best way to teach biology. When I was talking to students in my classes about cell and molecular biology, their eyes glazed over. It is very abstract. You can’t see it, smell it or touch it because these things are very small; you need microscopes. Food, on the other hand, is practical. Everybody eats.

Paola: This is the same reason why I want to use food to explain to people that design is not just cute and expensive chairs. If you eat it, then you can understand it.

So, what do you think about the “molecular cuisine” term that is used so much?

Marion: [Laughs] Well, actually, when my partner and I went to elBulli…

Paola: You did?

Marion: Oh we did!

Paola: Was it a good experience?

Marion: It was a great aesthetic experience. The presentations were exquisite. Everything was served on these interesting, curved objects that you would never think of as plates. But the taste didn’t live up to it.

Paola: I’m not surprised but it is just funny that it all comes full circle and you get molecular cuisine.

Marion: It was very funny actually because it is very bad science. It is very trivial science. I went to a demonstration recently and they make a very big deal out of emulsions when these are not all that complicated. There is not very much science involved, but people love the idea.

Paola: When you say food, there are so many ways to think about it. I always think in terms of scale and architecture; in the way the food units are design while the plates become more architectural. Then there is also the primal matter, discussed in books like Salt and Cod by Mark Kurlansky, for instance, which are so fascinating because they talk about food as a material. Cod could almost be considered concrete … 

When did you start your activist take on food?

Marion: I’ve always been an activist so it was very easy to start teaching food and nutrition, see how the political system influenced what people ate and also make that connection for students. It didn’t come as a big discovery. In that first class in the mid-1970s I had students read a series of articles from the New York Review of Books about sugar subsidies and how the agricultural system supported politically powerful sugar growers.

Paola: So that was before the big corn controversy.

Marion: Yes, before corn. We were supporting a small number of USA farmers to grow sugar and sell it at a higher price. Here I am today teaching a course on the Farm Bill at NYU and talking about exactly the same problem with sugar and the opposite problem with corn.

Paola: The Farm Bill and not Farmville…

Marion: I’ve never seen Farmville.

Paola: You’ve never seen Farmville?

Marion: No, because you have to log on and I don’t want to do all of that.

Paola: Yeah, you have to log onto Facebook, which is also one of the reasons why I don’t do it, but it’s interesting. There’s policymaking and then there’s education, and education can do a lot for policymaking. One approach to education is gaming, but I don’t know if that is the case with Farmville.

Marion: I consider Farmville to be a gap in my education!

Paola: When you were in Washington, what kind of policies were you working on?

Marion: I was in the Department of Health and Human Services with a very fancy title – “Senior Nutrition Policy Advisor” – the same title that the chef in the White House, Sam Kass, now has! I produced and edited a 700-page book on diet and chronic disease prevention while I was there.

Paola: Did it become legislation at all?

Marion: No, it was the first federal report that linked diet to the risk of heart disease, cancer and diabetes in 1988. It was a big research report, quite controversial and famous for telling everybody that they should eat less fat, which was very naïve.

Paola: Why naïve?

Marion: Well, it never occurred to the people working on the report that in taking the fat out of food, the food industry would replace it with sugar. I don’t think anybody realised how fiercely the food industry was going to oppose any advice that people should eat less of their products.

Paola: What do you think of the attempts to regulate food right now? There are no more trans fats in restaurants in New York City. What do you think about the legislation that now wants to tax sodas?

Marion: It is an amusing idea, mostly because I think soda companies are completely out of control in how they are pushing products, especially on young people. Anything that sets them back a little is probably helpful. The first thing you do if you’re trying to lose weight is to stop drinking sodas.

Paola: Even sugar-free sodas?

Marion: You probably shouldn’t even do sugar-free sodas, even though they don’t have calories, because it keeps the taste going.

Paola: Ah, so you think there should be a re-education?

Marion: Oh no, I think it should be policy. Education doesn’t work.

Paola: No, I meant policy to re-educate.

Marion: Education of individuals isn’t enough. You need policies that make it harder to eat things that aren’t good for you and easier to eat things that are good for you. Unfortunately our economic system doesn’t promote that.

Paola: Many designers today are working in a realm that is called “critical design”, especially at the Royal College of Art in London. There is one piece that we just acquired for the MoMA collection called “Foragers”, which was actually initiated by Design Indaba. It’s by Dunne & Raby, who are like the godparents of critical design. In the project, because of the scarcity of food in the future, Dunne & Raby show us trying to go back to digesting things that we haven’t digested in centuries, like roots and algae. We do so by outsourcing our gastro-intestinal system to different apparatus and machines.

These designers highlight critical issues with beautifully crafted scenarios that are filled with imagination, and that simply point in the direction of possible consequences. It is interesting to see how many people are working with the means at their disposal, which in some cases is data and research, and in other cases performances, trying to warn us about the food problem that is happening worldwide.

Do you do much research for the developing world or are you mostly focussed on the USA? Growing up in Italy, when I didn’t finish my food, my grandmother would say: “Think of the children in Biafra.”

Marion: For us it was the starving children in Europe!

Paola: [both laugh] But, do you have a take on the First World’s attitude towards the developing world when it comes to food?

Marion: They make our food at a very low cost, or at least the raw materials. Chocolate is the best example. The Third World raises the plants and collects the pods, and then we turn it into very expensive chocolate and they don’t get much money for it. The same is true of coffee, bananas and sugar.

Paola: This is one of those questions that I get very angry about when journalists ask me, but do you think that there’s hope for any kind of balance developing from all these issues in the world?

Marion: Only if people become more political. This is also another way in which using food is an easier way to teach people. It’s easier to understand the political economy of food than it is to understand how our economic systems promote climate change or income disparities or whatever. You can do it through food and people are more likely to listen.

Paola: Do you see any examples of better education towards a more political approach to food in Europe for instance?

Marion: Oh yes. The Scandinavian countries do all those things better. They have such a different view of the role of food in society that of course children are fed in school, mothers receive support when they have babies, college and education are free … It’s inconceivable for someone growing up in America to understand what that kind of social support is like.

Paola: So it’s the free market theory, it’s the “Chicago School approach” of human behaviour being determined by social structures that does not guarantee an equitable and valuable food culture?

Marion: Americans have a very different view of these things, which emphasises the personal and individual. For us it’s about the promotion of rights and privileges in the decisions of the individual, with little critical understanding of how individual decisions are shaped by the society in which we live.

Paola: The interests of the industry overwhelm this kind of individualism.

Marion: Yes, industry controls advertising, marketing and the way in which food is sold. What’s useful about food is that you can do experiments and actually demonstrate that, when it comes to food choices, free will isn’t enough. The easiest example is what happens when you serve people large portions of food. When you do, people eat more. It’s that simple. Everybody eats more when given large portions.

Paola: Yes, its been proven.

Marion: And you can measure it, and explain that large portions make you eat more, but if you give people large portions, they still eat more. So it’s not education that determines food choice, it’s the environmental triggers. People can learn to recognise them and change their own behaviour but it’s very difficult.

Let’s get round to what you do? [laughs]

Paola: I’ve been here at MoMA for almost 18 years. I’m an architect by training but, as I mentioned, I mistakenly did two years of economics. However, I do realise now that they are extremely precious for me and I still use them. My passion is contemporary design and architecture, far beyond furniture and products. I’ve done several shows at MoMA. A recent one was Design and the Elastic Mind, which was about designers and scientists working together. The one showing now is Talk To Me, which is about the communication between people and objects that happens even more explicitly now because of digital technology.

I came to food in a very similar way to you: passion. I’m Italian, I used to be a really round big child. I lost 20kgs when I was 14 and then I went into all sorts of vagaries about my relationship with food, but I still love it. And when I came to New York, I realised that design is considered prettification and that it was difficult to talk about design in a way that was understandable to everybody. I won’t lead you through it, but I decided to find any way possible to show people in the USA what design really is. That’s how I came to food as a way of doing this and I started working on my book that I spoke about earlier, which is called Design Bites.

Marion: Oh good. Good title!

Paola: I have so much research already. It’s based on the idea of really understanding how food is designed. Pasta is almost like a stereotype – every shape is different because it has to accommodate a different sauce. But the book gets more and more technical until it gets to high-tech foods, and eventually all those toxic kinds.

It really came to me, for the same reason as yours about molecular biology, as a way to bypass too much intellectualism. You can be intellectual afterwards but the first interaction with food is so instinctual, that it can really drive the point home and get under your skin.

One day I’m going to make a list of designers for you that do food just to get your take.

Marion: Yes I’d love that. That would be wonderful.

===== FILE: index_split_018.html =====

Inside Out: Admen Andrew Whitehouse and Matthew Bull move to NYC

1 January 2012

Two South African admen move to New York to start an agency. The punchline? Why not.

Andrew Whitehouse and Matthew Bull. Illustration by Katrin Coetzer.

In 2011 Matthew Bull, former chief creative officer of Lowe and Partners and founder of South African agency Lowe Bull, teamed up with Andrew Whitehouse, executive creative director at FoxP2, to launch a New York-based agency, The Bull-White House, sister agency to South Africa’s FoxP2. In 2012 they talk about their move to New York and how they feel looking back at South Africa from afar.

Andrew Whitehouse: Why?

Matthew Bull: Why not?

Andrew: Good answer.

Matthew: Did you ever imagine, when you were a young kid growing up in the hard lands of Edenvale that you would ever live in New York, have a business in New York?

Andrew: I didn’t even dream I’d live in Cape Town, have a business in Cape Town. Actually, have a business full stop.

Matthew: So you loved Cape Town and you loved South Africa and you loved going to work every day at FoxP2. Why did you leave?

Andrew: Ditto to you, just replace Fox with Lowe Bull.

Matthew: Well, I got this advice many years back from the head finance guy at Hunt Lascaris Johannesburg – he told me, when he heard I’d been offered a job in Cape Town, to never run away, only run to. And I was always going to live in New York, it was just a matter of when. And the time felt right. It was time to make space at Lowe Bull for the people there, and it was time to make space for myself back in the world of global advertising.

Andrew: When I left New York to start FoxP2 in Cape Town, I never knew if I’d ever go back or if Cape Town would be home for the rest of my life. I don’t think anyone with an open mind can really plan much beyond five years. Right now, New York seems pretty permanent, but who knows what will have happened by 2016. I feel that people should follow their hearts. If that means leaving our beloved country, do it. You’ll only come back enriched with new experiences. Or you’ll stay there enriched by new experiences.

Matthew: Are you scared?

Andrew: Living overseas is the most mind-jolting thing I have ever done. I have lived in London, Paris and New York. Every time it kicks me in the head, the heart and the balls. It shakes up every part of me. Sometimes it’s painful and sometimes it’s beautiful. The only thing that remains the same is your skin, and hopefully your accent. Everything else is different. It’s like living someone else’s life. From the direction water flushes down your toilet to the mode of transport you use to get to work every day. Scary – no, adventure – yes.

Matthew: After all these years, I finally understand what my first love meant when she said: “It’s not you, it’s me.” Okay, she didn’t mention the other guy she was schtupping at the time … but I am excited by the things I don’t know here in America.

It’s an adventure again. I’m an explorer, endlessly restless. I’ve lived in the UK, I’ve worked all over the world. But South Africa is my alma mater – it’s the reason I am where I am, am who I am.

Andrew: It’s sometimes difficult for people to appreciate just how globally respected South Africa is as a creative force. SA is a tiny, tiny place in the context of Europe, America and Asia, but somehow we produce creative work that permeates those massive markets. Just yesterday I walked into Kid Robot in the middle of SoHo, New York, and saw a bunch of designer toys and murals from floor to ceiling designed by SA’s very own Kronk.

Matthew: How do you feel South Africa has contributed to your creative growth, your outlook on the business? What I feel, upon reflection, is that the possibilities matched the expectations: limitless. I mean, we were encouraged to always invent new things, new ideas, yes, but even new media forms. Other more mature markets don’t give you that latitude.

Andrew: What South Africa does for creatives is allow them to shine.

It allows them to leapfrog their foreign counterparts. The odds are seriously stacked against you if you want to get noticed starting from the ground up in a place like America by sheer numbers alone (and often bureaucracy). South Africa gives creatives an uncluttered platform to have a global profile. I have seen it so many times in most creative industries, do well in South Africa and the world will see.

Andrew: Do you think you’ll ever go home?

Matthew: I’m not sure. I genuinely consider America to be my home now. But, even though my Mom gave birth to me in England, I feel South Africa is where I was born. I’ll always want to go back, but I’ll never want to stay. How do you feel?

Andrew: I don’t plan to, but nor did I plan to leave before. If I wasn’t living abroad seven years ago I’d never have started FoxP2. Going away ended up creating something beautiful in SA. I just take great comfort knowing that I will always be connected to the creative soul in SA and have a part to play.

Matthew: So that’s a maybe?

Andrew: That’s a “Why not?”

===== FILE: index_split_019.html =====

Inside Out: Architect Don Albert and fashion designer Amanda Laird Cherry play on the world stage

1 January 2012

Two great South African creative exports – an architect and a fashion designer – discuss the challenges of flexing their creative muscles on the world stage.

Architect Don Albert and fashion designer Amanda Laird Cherry. Illustration by Katrin Coetzer

Don Albert: Let’s start from the beginning then – why did you leave?

Amanda Laird Cherry: A good opportunity came my husband’s way.

Don: I’d have thought you’d be one of the last people that would leave South Africa, given the strong connection your brand has to Africa?

Amanda: Agreed. I was surprised myself!

Don: So what does your day-to-day entail? Are you still running your brand in South Africa?

Amanda: Yes, with email and Skype the connection lives. I had always wanted to live in NYC for one year – study further at FIT or Parsons. But the idea of living abroad was something we had said no to several times. This time it was compelling and we view it as an adventure.

Don: So you haven’t emigrated as such – you still have significant ties back home?

Amanda: No, we haven’t emigrated, we still have our house in Kloof. I go back every two months or so.

Don: Sounds exciting … In my case I also still have business ties and property in South Africa, but I did actively choose to relocate my headquarters to Singapore in search of opportunities. I was advised to simply close shop and start afresh, but it’s not as easy as it sounds, especially in architecture when one’s responsibilities on projects go on for years. In any event, I still believe in South Africa but felt the urge to spread my wings. I’m excited about Asia.

Amanda: So what is your setup now?

Don: Well, the business is registered in Singapore, although our first project has been the Voyager Boutique Creative Retreat, which is actually in Bali, so I have spent the last year designing and building that. It seems we now have more Bali hotel projects in the wings so I’m going to spend a bit more time here. I go back to Singapore for admin and banking occasionally, but in general my life is quite idyllic in Bali. I’m assisted by my partner, Justin, but I still rely on my South African associates from time to time on the production side … so far, so good. How about you? Do you have any assistants with you or are you doing it all alone?

Amanda: I work on my own here and liaise with my Durban studio. Setting up here is not simple!

Don: Singapore is fantastic. I registered my business and opened a bank account in one day! Tax accounting is a bit more onerous, and expensive... about four times what I pay in South Africa!

Anyway ... so socially, how have you found North Carolina? Where are you exactly?

Amanda: We’re in Charlotte, three hours inland. It’s a mixed bag here – a bit of a “country club” vibe in the ’burbs, and creative enclaves and great restaurants in the city.

Don: Is there a design culture there?

Amanda: Limited, especially the architecture here, which is mostly traditional. I was hoping to find a home like I had seen around LA … but not to be.

Don: Sounds like you are looking for a mid-modern bungalow! Do you miss Durban? And what of it?

Amanda: I miss the entrepreneurial South African creativity but going back so often I don’t have to miss anything for too long.

Don: That’s ideal. Just the right amount of distance! I love South Africa and miss it terribly, but here in Bali there is such a relaxed lifestyle. I really don’t miss the traffic in South Africa, and of course the constant political freakshow, or having to fly around so much just in order to do business.

Amanda: So what do you miss?

Don: I miss the laughter and the diversity of languages. I miss the accents of Capetonians (all of them!). I miss the sense of humour. Bali is very cosmopolitan though, and the Balinese are simply wonderful: intriguing, beguiling and often charming. Sometimes frustrating … but generally very creative and industrious. There is a big design culture (for export) here in Bali. Plenty of homewares, a little bit of fashion and lots of lifestyle stuff. It’s their biggest economy second to tourism. So have you made new friends in Charlotte?

Amanda: Yes, contrary to what I was told, I’ve made lots of friends.

Don: Very important that. It has been harder to make friends in Bali, but I do have wonderful neighbours, and we have become friends, so that helps. And there is a coterie of fashionistas and retailers here that we also hang out with, so it’s fun. Obviously there are client/friend relationships too, but real friendships take time. So, do you feel you have grown as a person by relocating and seeing a different side of life? And has it affected your design?

Amanda: Definitely! Some of the “cleaner” but still interesting aspects of American clothing design have crept into my work... I’m enjoying the fusion. How about you, have your surroundings and the culture affected your creativity?

Don: Well, I’ve always practised architecture as a critique of its context, so I’m pretty much carrying on as usual. But I do love designing for the tropics and using building methods that are foreign to me, like thatch, bamboo, stone and timber. I never thought I’d ever design a thatch building in my life, but here we are, thatch with a twist! We’re also doing some cave dwellings – a first for me, so it’s very interesting. And I’m picking up the Indonesian language from actually building. (Not all swear words mind you.)

I’m also reassessing my attitudes to life and the concept of progress as it relates to architecture. I’m quite happy to take life a little slower and look for beauty in simplicity. Does the world really need more, more, more all the time?

I’m hoping not.

Amanda: Yes, I’ve also begun to look at so much through a different lens … been attributing some of it to my age!

Don: Same same.

Amanda: And a new environment. When I first arrived it surprised me how taxing it was just to source daily needs. Small things became like a major task to be accomplished, especially shopping for groceries, which would take me hours to do!

For the entire first year I would get to the afternoon and be stressed out as I had not even done half of what I had expected to get through. And then there was the time difference, which was difficult in some ways, but in other ways freeing. All of this forced me to consider my life more and, I guess, think differently.

Don: You do get a fresh perspective and find yourself taking on new challenges that you may never have been exposed to before. It can be difficult and also worrying, but as a designer you go on your gut and simply design your way around it!

Amanda: Exactly!

===== FILE: index_split_020.html =====

Inside Out: Graphic designers Peet Pienaar and Heidi Chisholm look at Africa from abroad

1 January 2012

Graphic designers Peet Pienaar and Heidi Chisholm talk about Africa’s connection to their work and living abroad.

Peet Pienaar and Heidi Chisholm. Illustration by Katrin Coetzer.

Peet Pienaar: So, Heidi, why did you leave South Africa?

Heidi Chisholm: I didn’t plan to leave, but my husband won a green card and wanted to experience a new culture. You?

Peet: I didn’t really leave. I still have a lot of projects in South Africa and linked to South Africa, but I felt I needed to explore stuff outside and then link it up with stuff happening back home. However, I’ve just moved to Buenos Aires as I feel I have to live here to get more involved and try to make a difference.

Heidi: Can you tell me about some projects that you’re doing that can explain this?

Peet: Toffie design festival is happening both in South Africa and South America, our shops in Cape Town and Buenos Aires stock designers’ work from both countries, and we’ve just developed a magazine called Paris that will be focussing on life in the South (South Africa, Argentina and Brazil).

It seems that your connection to Africa is very important in your work?

Heidi: Yes, Africa is still my main inspiration. I’m involved with a project called Mr Somebody and Mr Nobody. Part art installation and part commercial design endeavour, it’s a collaboration that is a way to tell our emmigrant stories. The products express what it means to be African abroad.

Peet: Will we be seeing your products in South Africa any time soon?

Heidi: We would love to take it to South Africa, but our small-scale production would make it a bit expensive. Hopefully we’ll get things fine-tuned and one day take it to Africa.

Tell me more about Paris.

Peet: The more time I spent in South America, the more I realised how similar we are. We’re all ex-colonial, developing countries with similar problems, climate and location. Paris looks at the South and tries to show that while it’s very different to the North, it’s okay to be down here. It’ll be launched at Toffie at the end of March 2012.

Heidi: Do you have clients in South America? Do you still do work for MTV?

Peet: I’m still doing commercial work for MTV Latin America and Boca Juniors – one needs to pay the bills and find ways to support the love projects.

Heidi: What is local design for you?

Peet: I think South Africans are obsessed with this idea of local. It has a lot to do with fear of an open market in South Africa that has killed many industries and also the search for a unified culture that is South African. But local for me is just being honest in what you’re doing and who you are. Designers ask me why I left and what about “Local is Lekker”. My answer to that is I didn’t leave as much as I went hunting in bigger fields. My local is just bigger now. What is this idea of borders?

I’m local where I feel at home.

How about you? What is local design for you?

Heidi: I think our designers have different influences just like everywhere in the world, so I don’t think one should say this or that is or isn’t South African design.

Peet: How do you feel about people judging you for leaving?

Heidi: I did not leave South Africa by choice – I challenge anyone to go through what I did and then still have that attitude.

Now that I have a new place where I’m happy, I am trying – through Mr Somebody and Mr Nobody – to give back to South African communities by producing some of our products there.

Have you felt judged?

Peet: I didn’t leave because I felt South Africa is on its way down, I left because I wanted to broaden my playing field and my experience. So I have a clear conscience ... we only live once! Do you think it is good for your design to be in New York?

Heidi: Coming here helped me gain some perspective on design and also on what’s happening in South Africa. Being abroad lets you stand back and see things more clearly. Another insight I’ve gained from living here is that there are a lot of good designers out there and we should be supportive of one another and be happy for each other’s good work. People here share and credit whoever needs credit. They have conferences and a lot of it’s free and this way the industry keeps fluid and it feels light. I like that because I think design is not heart surgery – it shouldn’t be taken too seriously.

Peet: I agree. In comparison to people here, South Africans are extremely harsh to each other. If you were to do or say similar things in Argentina, people would oust you as crazy and nobody would touch you. Living in Buenos Aires makes me see South Africa very clearly. When I’m back home I feel cluttered with everyday pettiness. But when I’m here I can see clearly that the biggest challenge for South Africa is education, and I can see what free education does here – you have 30 000 design students in one university in Buenos Aires. The better your marks are, the better the lecturer you get. And many people teach for free because they studied for free.

Heidi: Oh, wow, that’s amazing. Here the competition is so incredibly high, people from all over the world want to study in New York. That’s another thing I see in New Yorkers – they don’t complain about hard work and they’re never too sure of themselves because they know there’s always someone better. Maybe that’s why they’re not so mean to each other – they don’t think too much of themselves.

Peet: It’s the same here. Because it’s free, the whole of the Spanish-speaking South studies here. And the standard is so high – you have to do maths as a subject for a two-year design course!

So what would you change in South Africa to make it better in terms of design? (I can already hear people saying, “Keep your advice to yourself.”)

Heidi: I think something like a first Friday could be amazing – once a month, before work, you invite a speaker to share some insight. It could happen at a different agency each month. Oh, and it would be free.

Peet: I’d make education free and block imports to protect local industries. I would put designers on committees to advise on how cities develop. I would make a huge effort to get South African design products on the world stage and form partnerships with Brazil. Get designers to learn a Latin language – Spanish, Portuguese, French or Italian.

Heidi: Just a few small things then?

===== FILE: index_split_021.html =====

Q&A: Stop waiting, start making – lessons in liveability from Jeanne van Heeswijk

19 July 2013

Based in Rotterdam, Jeanne van Heeswijk is a visual artist who creates situations in public places to provoke interactions between members of the public.

Jeanne van Heeswijk. Photograph supplied by the designer.

These provocations include talking to trees, arranging fashion marches and baking bread, but all are aimed at setting up opportunities for new encounters and dialogue – in a way that is finely tuned to the subtlety of needs, desires and ambitions of a local people and place. Jeanne presented some of her work at Design Indaba 2013. Here she shares more of her thoughts on public engagement, gentrification and the value of co-production:

A lot of your work spans a long period of engagement, often five, six years. What is the value of time in your design process?

Jeanne: I think spending time is a very important design element – to learn about the situation; to learn about the questions. Sometimes you have to hear things ten times just to understand the nuances of the way things are articulated. Quite often, when you enter a community for the first time or do work within a community, the first people you meet are already organised in one way or another. So they are often outspoken and they have a certain way to speak about the situation that is either angry or optimistic, depending whose side they are on. Spending time gives you the opportunity to hear more people’s opinion and different nuances of the same thing. 

For example in Anfield, Liverpool, [where a housing renewal scheme meant people’s homes where bought up by the state for redevelopment that never took place] people repeatedly said: “We don’t like what is happening in our area. We don’t like these boarded-up houses. We are angry with the council.” But it was not until someone said that they were “sick of the waiting” that we really came to the crux of the matter. And what we’re talking about here is two things: waiting as an activity and not feeling well about it. In an area where you want to encourage living well, it is interesting to start working with this idea: to stop the waiting and to start making. This might seem like a very simple idea, but it is about the way it is formulated. We could have said: “Ok, you don’t like the boarded-up houses, let’s open up the houses again,” but actually I don’t think that would have created the same process in order to stop the waiting.

By creating something collectively, by doing and making, whether it is a building or a loaf of bread, once you start producing again, it moves people from waiting into action. For me it is a very important condition for all my projects: to co-produce change, to co-produce an environment. And for that you need to work together and learn together and you basically just need to spend time. In practical terms that doesn’t mean I necessarily stay around all the time. Sometimes it is good to go back and forth. Often I spend a chunk of time, three to four months at a time, working on a specific project.

You work in communities across the globe. How do you overcome being an outsider?

I don’t believe in the local as a fixed unity. Locality is a mix of what I call local experts. A local expert can be someone who lives there but it can also be someone who works there. For example in the Afrikanerwijk, Rotterdam, the market stallholders, who are only there on market days, are very important for what happens in the area. They come from all over the Netherlands and even outside the Netherlands but they have an expertise because they know what it means to be at that market. This is an important dynamic. Sometimes certain localities have certain emergent issues that need experts to come from outside because they don’t have that specific expertise on location.

What are the ingredients for successful participation?

I think there is no recipe for it. That is the thing. Too often we want to try to package participation into recipes, strategies or deliverables so that we can easily tick the boxes at the end of the day. In my work I set up a situation where we can start producing again. You have to set up camp; set up shop; set up your studio there. Start working on site with people in the conditions that are there.

I think it is vital that all projects should be site-specific, context-specific, people-specific. There is no recipe for that because every situation is really different. Although there are some global trends and the pressure of capitalism drives the need for renewal everywhere, every situation is so specific: of course you have to work with the people who are there. I don’t think you should enter into a process completely blind: I do my research very well, but you have to go in there with the ability and the desire to learn about the situation and not with a preconceived plan or criteria or ideas. You can’t arrive with something and say: “Oh, I already drew something that you might like … ”

If capitalism has made us passive consumers, then how can we become active producers? How do you overcome passivity and bring people to action?

You keep poking them. Sometimes this is the hardest thing for people to do; to step over that boundary, to leave that passive consumerism behind and really start taking part. It is hard because becoming an active participant in producing an environment means taking risks. If you take risks, you make mistakes. People might not like what you produce, so you are continuously confronted with “the other” and confrontation is not something that makes us comfortable. But it is something we need in order to have a relationship with anyone or anything.

We need to confront and negotiate the difference; the different perception of what self and identity is or what we are together or can be together. The future you imagine and my vision might look completely different, yet here we are sitting together on this couch and we have to figure it out.

What is the value of making or producing?

To make is very important. Almost in a Marxist way we need to reclaim the right and means of production. I think at this moment in time we need to claim the right to produce culture; to produce cultural relationships and the cultural sphere. We need to reclaim this right from advertising, mass media and consumerism. I am an old-fashioned believer in the idea that we have to make things ourselves in order to get a grip on reality.

So how do you feed the ideas that develop through the process back into formal structures?

You have to work together with formal structures. I don’t really believe in outsiders; us and them; we’re all in the mix together and that is important. Quite often I have good alliances with people in office but sometimes there is a particular need to not make an alliance with some local council or authority figure because their politics or their ways in dealing with the community are questionable.

Now you can never do that when things become really broken because, even if you are not in alliance, you have to stay in conversation; there has to be dialogue. I often use civil disobedience in my work and it is demonstrative of how things can be different. It is not necessarily trying to go against a law or regulation but just opening up the space to show alternatives, what can be possible. For example with the Afrikanerwijk project [where Jeanne systematically questioned and subverted regulations that governed the market through a series of experiments] the best design or product that actually came out of the process was to influence new legislation on the market. Sometimes you have to work with policy makers or lawyers, urban designers and governments. You have to find ways to package everything that you found in the process so that it can be translated back to power.

You are not a big fan of the words “upgrade” or “urban renewal”. Why is that?

Because they’re quite often linked to the idea of what we call “progress” without having collectively defined what that will mean. Sometime progress is taking a step back; progress is not always a linear thing; progress is something that is an organic system of learning. Often renewal is used to push an agenda of clearance, with some groups no longer being able to take part in that society; an agenda of exclusion.

How do we circumvent the problematic issue of gentrification?

It is very hard to circumvent it because one way or another it will happen eventually. For instance in Anfield we are really far away from it. I don’t think you will be able to buy a latte [Jeanne’s anecdotal measure for gentrification] there anytime very soon. But that makes me think of Lynne, one of the community members in Anfield. She said: “We deserve better. We deserve more than what is given to us. We are not just deprived people; we just need something different. Who are you to tell me that I can’t have that latte?” What Lynne managed to capture was that she might want the area to be gentrified but if that latte means she can’t pay her rent anymore, then it is a problem. But it also doesn’t mean she doesn’t like the cappuccino. And that is maybe the other side of the story. We have to find a better way to create inclusive renewal, instead of just having one idea about what renewal is. We have to be sensitive. We have to actively listen and not smoke out all the people who participate in an area.

Have you ever had a project that you felt failed?

I think they all fail in some way or another. That is why I say they are all processes of continuous learning. Every time you learn from a situation and you try again. That doesn’t mean you don’t fail again, but you learn to make the mistakes more elegantly.

How do you know when the project is done?

There is always a moment when a community says “Thank you”. And “Thank you” is very different from “Thanks”. “Thank you” is a way of saying “I think we are capable of continuing on our own, or we raised enough of our own momentum, or trust in the fact that we can do it ourselves,” and that becomes a cue for me to leave. But then I have worked with communities that have phoned back a year later because there is another situation and I am also happy to go back.

Why do you do this work?

I am a believer in the fact that we are in a very turbulent time, in a very tense time and as a result it is very important that we figure out how we can live together. And for that you can wake me up every day. I am a believer in a better world.

===== FILE: index_split_022.html =====

Q&A: Nairobi dispatch – filmmaker Ng’endo Mukii returns to Kenya

2 December 2013

Award-winning filmmaker, animator and director Ng’endo Mukii gives Design Indaba the lowdown on the experience of returning to Kenya after eight years abroad.

Ng’endo Mukii. Image: Alex MacNaughton.

Ng’endo Mukii is a mixed media artist who uses a combination of pixillation, stop motion live action and hand-drawn animation to great effect in her multi-award-winning short film, Yellow Fever. Through memories and interviews, Yellow Fever explores the way media affects how women see themselves – especially African women – and comments on the media’s Eurocentric portrayal of female beauty.

Yellow Fever was Ng’endo’s thesis project at the Royal College of Art in London where she obtained her Master of Arts in Animation in 2012. She first received her bachelor’s degree in film animation and video from the Rhode Island School of Design (RISD) in the US. Initially when she enrolled at RISD, she imagined becoming an illustrator or painter, until she discovered film and animation. The rest, well, is history. She does, however, paint and draw in and on her film, video and animation work. “I tend to instinctively employ the medium I feel works best for the content being explored,” she says.

Ng’endo is one of five recipients of the Focus Features Africa First film grant. She is working on the pre-production of her next film, The Teapot, with the awarded funds.

What made you return to Kenya after studying and working in the US and the UK? 

Ng’endo: Deciding where to live and work is always influenced by many factors. When I completed my studies in the US I remember finally having the sense that I was not constantly chasing something outside my reach and running myself into the ground. The Rhode Island School of Design has a tough curriculum and senior year brought many sleepless nights and a constant state of emergency.

When we graduated, the pace changed. I remember promising myself that I would “never under ANY circumstances” treat my mind, body and soul to such a battery of demands, lack of food (I would forget to eat when working) and stress, for the sake of a project. I decided to give myself a year in the US to work and travel, explore different parts of the country and discover the things that had been under my nose for the previous four years. And that’s what I did.

I worked out how much money I needed to allow me the freedom to do other things. I got work that was flexible enough to allow, and even require me, to travel. I saved up for trips and visited friends to help them on projects. I pranced across as many states as possible and took it in, so to speak, because I knew I wanted to go home at the end of it all. That’s how I lived for a year, then packed up and came home.

There was a “now or never” element to it as well. When you come to adulthood in a foreign country, and form very strong bonds with the people and places around you, it can seem almost impossible to separate yourself from this new family and return home. Sensing this I gave myself this deadline, ignored all the calls to renew visas and apply for different work permits as well as the panicked question, “But what will you do in Kenya?!!” and stayed focussed on the final destination: Nairobi.

By the time I got home, I had not seen my family for six years. And, not to sound foreboding or anything of the sort, I think it is important that we consider how the separation of distance and time affects this basic core unit of society. That being said, I grew up imagining that whatever art I would create, would reflect something of my home and my experiences as a Kenyan.

What I wanted to harvest by training abroad was technical skill and to open myself to the possibilities of different ways of thought. By doing so I could better express my own personal interpretation and experiences of my home.

The two years spent at the Royal College of Art in London gave me the space I needed to reconfigure my work process and decide what type of work I wanted to be creating as an artist. The students were brilliantly gifted and hardworking, and this created a strong work ethic with a lot of creative ideas being shared among us.

Coming back home from the UK was a much less complicated affair. The anti-immigration rhetoric flaunted by Theresa May and the like painted international students as a drain on national resources and the cause of unemployment across the country. Policies were changing repeatedly, and taking effect immediately. Within a few months of living in the UK I knew it was not the place for me beyond school. It was quite disappointing to spend years of savings on exorbitant school fees in a foreign country that then claims you’re misusing their National Health Service on your broken leg.

How does living in Nairobi affect your work? You said in an interview about returning to Kenya that everything felt new again. Do you find this “newness” has given you a renewed energy for filmmaking?

There’s a beauty in returning home after being away for a long time. When I came back from the US, the sensation of unlocked memories resurfacing was overwhelming. I realised how interconnected my recollections were with my physical location. I walked through old territories retracing faded paths to memories, dreams and visions that had been washed into darkness with each day spent on distant soils.

I took to the camera to document my rediscoveries, but also as a buffer between myself, who was now a stranger, and the strangeness of my home. This “newness” allowed me to watch with the luxury of subjective distance, yet forced me to reflect on the relationships we have within our society and with the outside world in which I had lived. I think you form a different sensitivity based on having been away. There is also a sense of nostalgia that quietly seeps out of you over time, as you acclimatise, and I find that in-between period particularly stimulating.

You went to study with the intention of being an illustrator/painter and became a filmmaker/animator sort of by accident. Were you aware, growing up in Kenya, that the work you currently do was a possibility as a career, i.e. was there an established film and animation industry in Kenya at the time when you left to study abroad?

When I was growing up I would never have considered anything in television or film as a career. I remember sitting on the carpet waiting for the VOK (Voice of Kenya) channel to come to life. Testing bars and tone played across the screen, and I would turn the TV on and off because I didn’t yet know how to read time and neither was I patient enough to wait for the hour.

When the VOK news came on, a large portion of the broadcast would be spent informing us what the president, Rais Daniel Toroitich Arap Moi, had been doing all day. A full-cheeked, bright-eyed, curly-haired dashing version of himself would stare back at us benevolently in a three-quarter profile pose, while a female presenter told us which areas of the country he had visited, and how many plots he had given to grandmothers across the land (cut to smiling grandmothers holding title deeds and Baba wa Taifa [Father of the Nation] walking stoically). It wasn’t quite the appropriate environment to spark creativity, freedom of thought or personal expression. The most creative individual might have been the weatherman, but I was mostly interested in the clouds and lightning bolts that he attached to the map of Kenya.

As I started to colour in pictures, draw my own, and make flip books in my homework diary, I somehow didn’t make the connection to the cartoons I would watch on the weekends. The cartoons and films we watched as children “just were”, and I never questioned who or what had created them.

The change in Kenya over the last 15 years is drastic. Multiple broadcasters have sprung up; stations run 24 hours a day; cable and satellite TV is available; our production companies are churning out content to air locally and beyond our borders; women are writing apps and digital cities are being drawn up. While growing up, these opportunities were not available because this infrastructure did not exist.

As a side note, the first time someone asked if I had ever considered animation, I started laughing, thinking “What type of sad person wants to spend the rest of their life drawing pictures and moving objects over and over again?!”

And, here I am.

===== FILE: index_split_023.html =====

Q&A: Clive Wilkinson – the social agenda of buildings

17 December 2013

Clive Wilkinson, paradigm-defining architect of Googleplex, spoke at the conference at Design Indaba 2014. Here he shares insights into his approach to workplace design.

You often refer to the concept of the “social agenda of buildings”. What do you mean by “social agenda” in the context of the built environment? 

Clive: Buildings perform various roles for accommodating human needs. We consider that places of work are in a critical performance category in that their ability to support and enhance human interaction and social connectivity is a critical function. In the history of design there has been a rich speculation on the image characteristics and amenity offerings of dwellings, but until recently, an incredible absence of serious thought around the buildings that we inhabit for most of our waking lives: what are commonly called “offices”.

The doctor’s prescription for how a building is configured or organised is called a “program” in America, and a “client brief” in the UK and South Africa. These terms refer to a listing of basic functions that need to be accommodated in buildings, often with little or no acknowledgment that their primary purpose today is to facilitate knowledge sharing and social interaction.

Today, a building has become more than ever a theatre for staging the drama of productive human life.

Building performance is no longer based on basic air conditioning or glazing thermal performance. Technical issues are taking a backseat. In 2014, if the office cannot support innovation and ideation, it can fatally damage a business’s success in the marketplace.

The social agenda is therefore tied to effective knowledge sharing, business productivity and the life or death of companies.

You’re acknowledged as a global leader in workplace design. What prompted your specialisation in, and approach to, office design? 

From our first forays into the office market, we were concerned that any architectural expression needed to be grounded in a performance driven engineering of the organisational model. Office design had evolved from Taylorist concepts of efficiency that equated human beings with machines, and created a normative model that straightjacketed corporations and severely deformed personal growth and development in the workplace. The white-collar service economy has fortunately moved on, since computers have taken over routine work, and performance today is vulnerable to constant change and evolution.

Our eyes were opened in the 1990s by working with ad agencies who were very focussed on their workspaces. There is a common thought that these agencies have a frivolous culture, but considering that they literally live or die by an intensive production of fresh ideas, it is more useful to see them as a model of the new successful business, which equally needs a powerful ideation culture to drive performance and success. 

In 1997, we designed the “advertising city” project for the West Coast’s largest ad agency, TBWA/Chiat/Day, in Los Angeles. This project proposed a kind of highly connected and transparent village in a large warehouse for 450 employees with zero enclosed offices. Sixteen years later the agency still uses the same architecture, while it has expanded to over 900 people. The connected village concept has proved highly sustainable and cost effective.

While we were criticised at the time that this “fantasy” environment would date and be rapidly obsolete, the opposite has proven true. The architecture of the building is in fact rigorously related to cost-effective methods of construction to accommodate specific functions. The only thing that was new was the social agenda that was determined with the client: to produce scripted spaces that would foster collaboration and provide opportunities for new ways of working. In that sense, the building represents a set of “built ideas” and therefore appears unusual.

Since that project, we have been charged with numerous transformational projects for companies who understand how buildings can shape people, and communities.

We realised our mission was to build creative communities.

To prove that all businesses had this capacity for creativity (since it is an ability to conceive radically), we went to Australia to land the Macquarie Bank project of One Shelley Street in 2006. We were fortunate enough to go through a three-year journey of transformation with a very conservative client who went from old-fashioned offices to a completely mobile form of working for 3 000 employees. The resulting project, One Shelley Street, has been one of the most influential office projects in the world, primarily for its emphasis on supporting the wide range of social activities that an office must support, but also for a radical sustainability and technological agenda that future-proofed the building and its user organisation.

Do you believe that the built environment of a workplace can change or shape an organisational culture?

What we have learnt over the years is really very simple. Ideas shape our buildings. The absence of ideas also shapes our buildings. And weak ideas make weak buildings. Winston Churchill said, “We shape our buildings and thereafter, they shape us,” and this is fundamentally true. For instance, it is commonly known today that a primary contributor to ideation is the ability to “play” precisely because “play” resembles the beta-testing regime of trial-and-error mockups or simulations.

If an office does not incorporate play in some form, it communicates that there is “no place for play” or in other words, no place for testing ideas. And when it is communicated in this way, I think we can all see that the “serious” office is a dangerous place for any business.

You’re South African born yet you’ve never presented your work on SA soil. Do you consider this a homecoming?

I was born and grew up in Cape Town and studied initially at UCT. I left SA in 1976 primarily because of a deep rejection of apartheid, as did almost all my friends. It’s a profound sense of “reconnection” to present my work in South Africa, when last I presented as a third-year architecture student more than 30 years ago, so this is indeed a “homecoming”.

 

Proposed design of an undulating “endless table” by Clive Wilkinson for the Barbarian Group in New York.

Macquarie Group’s Ropemaker Place in London designed by Clive Wilkinson. Photo by Riddle-Stag.

Pallotta TeamWorks headquarters in Los Angeles designed by Clive Wilkinson. Photo by Benny Chan / Fotoworks.

===== FILE: index_split_024.html =====

Q&A: Beyond Entropy Africa and Luanda the paradigm city

5 September 2014

For architecture agency Beyond Entropy Africa, Luanda is a kind of muse inspiring bold, creative solutions to regional urban problems.

For an architecture group whose work is conceptual rather than built, Beyond Entropy Africa is causing some surprisingly significant ripples. Based in Luanda, Angola, the agency makes bold proposals based on in-depth research into the city’s urban fabric – in particular, its musseques (informal settlements) – and argues for a response to urban development that is in keeping with everyday people’s lived realities.

Beyond Entropy Africa was founded by Angolan architect Paula Nascimento and her Italian colleague, Stefano Rabolli Pansera, in 2011. It is the African arm of the larger network of Beyond Entropy, whose interests stretch across the globe to areas of territorial crisis – “from the urban sprawl of the most industrialised parts of the planet to the derelict infrastructures of deserted islands; from the overcrowded urban development of emerging countries to the preserved areas of historical urban centres”.

In the three years since its founding, Beyond Entropy Africa’s intelligent and context-sensitive proposals have caught the attention of the Angolan government and the industry at large. 

Nascimento and Rabolli Pansera have presented their work at the European Parliament in Bruxelles, and in a considerably short space of time have made a name for themselves based on their work at the Venice Bienniales. They were appointed by Angola’s Minister of Culture to develop its first pavilion at the 2012 Architecture Bienniale in Venice, and curated the country’s “Luanda, Encyclopaedic City” pavilion at the 2013 Venice Art Biennale, which won the Golden Lion for Best National Participation.

This was followed by Ilha de Sao Jorge, an exhibition held during the 2014 Architecture Bienniale in Venice, which has led to invitations to participate in lectures, debates and symposia in London, Porto and Milan.

Nascimento and Rabolli Pansera met as students at the Architectural Association School of Architecture in London, where the teachings of Pascal Schöning had a great impact on them. Schöning developed the concept of “cinematic architecture”, which uses the medium of film to reflect on the evolution of space over time (the space-time continuum). After their studies, Nascimento worked in Porto with award-winning Portuguese architect Álvaro Siza Vieira and then moved to Luanda, while Pansera went to Basel to work with Herzog de Meuron.

In this Q&A, they tell us why they set up their agency in Luanda and how the city is morphing in response to complex and often contradictory demands.

 

Angola’s pavilion at the 2012 Venice Architecture Biennial, which proposed the planting of Arundo Donax, a tall perennial cane, to create a new type of common ground in the city. Courtesy of Beyond Entropy Limited. Photo Credits: Paolo Utimpergher.

What defines the work of Beyond Entropy?

Paula Nascimento and Stefano Rabolli Pansera: Beyond Entropy uses the concept of energy as a privileged tool to analyse territorial conditions and to develop proposals in the form of architectural interventions, curatorial projects and cultural analysis. This choice derives from the urgency with which energy has been raised in recent years in the political, economical and scientific debates, but not quite in the cultural ones. Indeed, energy has often been considered either an exclusively technical issue (to be solved by engineers or by highly specialised technicians) or as something relating to the rhetoric of sustainability and therefore treated from a social, ecological and ultimately technical point of view. In opposition to this tendency, Beyond Entropy considers energy as a theoretical tool understand space in its relationship to becoming and to transformation.

What kind of impact do you think Beyond Entropy Africa has had thus far?

Paula and Stefano: Beyond Entropy Africa is a cultural agency and we formulate architectural proposals through a great variety of projects: pavilions, symposia, lectures and architectural proposals. Even if we haven’t developed architectural projects yet, we strongly believe in the architectural relevance of the research. The pavilions in Venice are extraordinary instruments that can be used to create a wide cultural debate that is not confined to the architectural discourse but involves politicians, entrepreneurs, sociologists and citizens. A pavilion raises the awareness of specific architectural problems not only in Venice but in the entire country.

 

“Luanda, Encyclopaedic City”, Angola’s pavilion at the 2013 Venice Art Biennale, which won the Golden Lion for Best National Participation. Courtesy of Beyond Entropy. Photo: Paolo Utimpergher.

Talk us through some of your proposals.

Paula and Stefano: As of now, we have formulated three proposals at the Biennale in Venice: a prototype of a common ground, an encyclopaedic palace and a cinematic exploration of modernist architecture. Each proposal complies with the irreducible complexity of the transformative nature of the African city, resistant to (or systematically subverting) any conventional zoning.

Conventions such as private property and destination of use are irrelevant as each space has simultaneous uses at different times of the day. Extreme high-density is the condition for such a transformation as it concentrates different programmes and functions onto the same site.

How did this play out in the Biennale pavilions?

Paula and Stefano: The pavilion of the 2012 Venice Architecture Bienniale proposed the creation of a new “common ground” [curator David Chipperfield’s theme] for Cazenga, one of Luanda’s largest musseques, which functions simultaneously as public space and infrastructure. Every space in the city is constantly becoming other from itself, thus turning the city into a morphing conurbation that resists any “zoning”. By avoiding any radical destruction of the urban fabric, the plantation of Arundo Donax [a tall perennial cane that grows in damp soils] in the interstitial spaces between buildings produces a new urban condition. Simultaneously garden and infrastructure for filtering waters and producing biomass for electricity, this energetic “common ground” develops an alternative method of imagining the African city.

For the 2013 Venice Art Biennale the pavilion focussed on the ways in which images can give form to how we experience the city. How can the knowledge of a city be organised through the taxonomy of its spaces? Angolan photographer Edson Chagas’ Found Not Taken series [which featured in the exhibition] is a systematic cataloguing of abandoned objects that are moved around the city to create new relationships between the objects and their urban context, their form and its codification. What relationship is created between spaces and their images? What role are imagination and creativity allowed to play in this urban taxonomy? In the ambiguity of a vision that uncovers and nonetheless reconstructs, what is delineated is an urban cartography mixing documentary-like precision and poetic reconstruction: a new way of observing the encyclopaedic wealth of spaces around us and, perhaps, a new way of inhabiting these spaces.

At the 2014 Bienniale, Ilha de Sao Jorge looked at the five Portuguese-speaking countries in Africa, using the theme of Absorbing Modernity. In the specific case of the exhibition, we focussed on these countries that, although geographically distant, share the same architectural model of Modernism that was imposed by Portuguese colonisation. 

 

Image from the series Found Not Taken, 2009-2013, by Edson Chagas, which featured in Luanda, Encyclopaedic City. Courtesy of Edson Chagas, APalazzo Gallery.

Tell us about the city of Luanda. How would you describe it to someone who has never been there?

Stefano: Luanda is chaotic and glamorous, primitive and futuristic, huge and unexpected. It is the combination of many contradictory spatial conditions that make it a wonderful and challenging city. In this respect, it is a wonderful example of space-time continuum.

Why did you decide to establish an office in Luanda?

Stefano: Paula lives and works in Angola but the choice of Luanda was not dependent on this accidental reason. For us, Luanda is the paradigm of the urban condition of the African Sub-Saharan region, defined by a lack of basic infrastructure and a high density of population.

During the civil war, large groups of rural people moved into the city. Its rapid growth, however, wasn’t supported by adequate infrastructures to manage and control this sudden pressure. Consequently, Luanda presents simultaneously both highly urbanised and rural conditions, typical of recently urbanised immigration centers. As the urban morphs constantly into the rural, infrastructure suddenly stops and this void is replaced by dumps, sewers and shelters. Despite the complexity and differences among urban areas, two recurring paradoxes define the peri-urban areas of Luanda: high density without high-rise buildings and large cities without infrastructures.

 

Image from the series Found Not Taken, 2009-2013, by Edson Chagas, which featured in Luanda, Encyclopaedic City. Courtesy of Edson Chagas, APalazzo Gallery.

How does Beyond Entropy Africa propose dealing with these paradoxes?

Paula and Stefano: We propose the model of “morphing space” to understand this condition. In fact, each space is “undecidable” as it simultaneously performs a variety of uses – it is at the same time house, office, warehouse or garage, etc.

What are the main challenges for a city such as Luanda?

Paula and Stefano: There are extraordinary geo-political dynamics that are currently shaping African cities: the huge and rapid increase of the urban population, the co-existence of economic growth and social problems, and the construction of new developments that often destroy the existing fabric and replace it with “modernist” typologies. These conditions oblige us to reinvent the concept of “city” because all the previous urban and architectural categories are irrelevant in the face of these transformations. 

How can architects and urban designers begin to address these issues?

Paula and Stefano: The main challenge for architects, planners and politicians is to invent a new urban model that is suitable for Luanda and that is not a blind copy of other territories. In this effort, we should refer not only to architects and designers but to a larger group of disciplines. In fact, the form of the city is something that is not limited to its aesthetic qualities but to the political form of the community. We believe that a deeper cultural discourse must take place in African cities to address these new challenges. 

 

Image from the series Found Not Taken, 2009-2013, by Edson Chagas, which featured in Luanda, Encyclopaedic City. Courtesy of Edson Chagas, APalazzo Gallery.

Do your ideas and proposals have relevance to Africa in a broader sense?

Paula and Stefano: We avoid considering Africa as a uniform territory where spatial conditions are identical. The continent presents a huge historical and cultural diversity that is reflected in the forms of the cities: what happens in East Africa is different from West Africa and within the same large geo-political regions there are very different conditions – Nigeria and Ghana, for example, or Senegal and Guinea Bissau.

We regard Luanda as a paradigm, as a privileged case study of the urban development in Sub-Saharan Africa. This does not mean that the territorial challenges of Luanda are recurring in identical forms everywhere in Africa, but that some traits of urban development are recurring in several other cities and that a meaningful intervention in Luanda could inform a general position for many other cities in Africa. Therefore the proposals that Beyond Entropy formulates are not related to a singular locality and are not universal solutions. They are real proposals that have a paradigmatic role for an entire territory.

 

Image from the series Found Not Taken, 2009-2013, by Edson Chagas, which featured in Luanda, Encyclopaedic City. Courtesy of Edson Chagas, APalazzo Gallery.

What is the state of the architecture industry in Angola?

Paula: I would say it is a young yet booming industry, with its downsides and complexities. On the one hand, there is a huge demand not only in terms of public works and infrastructure but also in the private sector, which is becoming more and more aware of the importance of hiring architects and professionals to develop projects.

The number of relevant projects completed by local studios is very small, with the exception of a number of buildings designed by one of the biggest local studios, mainly in Luanda.

Are there any notable projects or buildings that have been completed recently?

Paula: The biggest public projects being implemented are the satellite towns built around Luanda and other major cities. These are large projects planned to solve the housing shortage and to fill the gaps of social and middle-class housing, as well as big requalification projects of major neighbourhoods. Even these types of projects, which demand a multisectorial and multidisciplinary approach, are mainly designed abroad or by foreign consultants with the involvement of local institutions and technicians. This generates other types of problems in terms of the projects’ implementation and success.

 

Still from the film UMA CABANA 2014 © Suleimane Biai and Filipa César. From the Ilha de São Jorge exhibition at the 2014 Venice Architecture Biennale. Courtesy of the artists and Beyond Entropy Limited.

And within the city itself?

Paula and Stefano: There are a number of buildings on the verge of completion: the National Assembly, which is nothing more than a pastiche of the National Bank (a colonial building); a number of high-rise buildings for offices and banks; and the Luanda marginal project [a 3km-long bayside promenade with public-use areas], among others. Architecture as a culture and discipline that is helping to shape the face of the city in a positive way is still in its early stages.

===== FILE: index_split_025.html =====

Conversation: Luyanda Mpahlwa and Mokena Makeka – creating an African architectural identity

15 August 2011

Mokena Makeka and Luyanda Mpahlwa chat about using public space, culture, fun and romance to create an African architectural identity.

 

Mokena Makeka’s Public Transport Shared Services Centre in Athlone.

Luyanda Mpahlwa: I came back from Germany in 2000, which is where I qualified and also where I worked for 15 years. Coming back to Cape Town, I wanted to get involved with what’s happening in the architecture scene at university level and get to know the young designers like you, Mokena. Then I heard that actually you are one of the top dogs.

Mokena Makeka: (laughing) I don’t know about that.

Luyanda: After that introduction, I became aware of your thesis and the Robben Island competition you were doing with another student, Mpho Matsipa. Now, Robben Island is very close to my heart because I spent five years of my life there, so I was following what was happening with interest. It was interesting for me to see that there was a new generation of architects who were getting involved in quite serious interventions.

 

Thusong Service Centre, a multipurpose facility in Khayelitsha by Mokena Makeka.

Mokena: I’ve always had an intense respect for you, Luyanda. I must mention that when I was presenting my thesis, my thesis had two propositions. The one was obviously a museum as a building to help transform the city, but there was another side to it in that it was really meant to bring in a different dialogue about culture. You were an external examiner and actually one of a few people who understood the intentions of the project. Whether or not they were achieved is a different debate, but we clicked immediately because in your own way you have done a lot of work in pushing African architecture, such as with the South African embassy in Berlin museum. We were grappling with the same question: How can architecture transform our place? I have always looked at your work as a beacon of where we need to go architecturally, because we’re both curious about how we can be different. Not for the sake of being different but to transform the country.

Luyanda: In terms of your interventions I think that it’s important to mention that, for both of us, it is about the practice and the institution of buildings in public spaces, and how South African culture can start finding expression in our architecture. This is exactly what I was trying to do with the embassy in Berlin. We tried to bring in cultural practices by manifesting it in art, like the carving of plaster that has been practised by women throughout the history of African society, especially in the Sotho areas. At the time it was also the first embassy by the new government and it had to reflect transparency, ensuring that the public passing through our embassy could look right through into our building because this is what South Africa is about.

To let that lead into another discussion, I think that it is very important that as architects, especially who both happen to be black and in Cape Town, we push the boundaries by saying that there is this different perspective to architecture, one that needs to start flowing into the design of buildings and the occupation of public spaces.

Mokena: I think we’re both driven by the belief that an African design is possible, that excellence can emerge from within our culture. That we do not need to imitate other places in order to be excellent. At the same time, to be excellent in Africa also means that we do not reject the good things that other cultures produce. Being African doesn’t necessarily mean beadwork and thongs. It’s about asking how we participate in the future.

I’m still fascinated by South Korea. The Koreans who emerged after the war were pretty much decimated, almost obliterated, but they consciously continued to participate in the global discourse of technology and improvement while remaining Korean. Now there is LG, Samsung, etc. While the government and society invested in its own people, what is significant is that they didn’t think that in modernising they had to forget who they are.

 

Football Training Centre in Soweto by Luyanda Mpahlwa.

Luyanda: I would actually say that there is a resistance to accept and acknowledge that there is something that could be referred to as an African architecture. This resistance is a denial of the fact that as Africans we think in a particular way. When I was studying in Germany, my professors wanted to know how we build where I come from. They weren’t interested in whether I was capable of applying the high technology and industrialisation of Germany, which they knew they were teaching me and had no doubt that I would learn.

Mokena: I want to put a different spin on this by talking about the concept of love. You know, as scholars of architecture we read up about other countries, and how the architects loved the places they were in and the clients loved getting the architects to express who they were. We come from a position where we love Africa but that doesn’t mean we love it to a point where we over-romanticise it. We love it, we believe in it and we want to make architecture that we can look back at and say “this is a reflection of us dealing with our context in a positive way”.

For instance, there is a whole range of things for which we haven’t claimed public space. Do you know the amount of rituals that people have in their backyards because there is this unsaid rule that it is not meant to be expressed in public, whether it is circumcision or barbequing? Somehow the public space is a no-go zone and it comes from our history where public space, quite frankly, was controlled by a very particular elite. The moment you use public space in diverse ways, a different dialogue happens. In Green Point, I’m always fascinated how the Muslim community go there at a certain time of year to see the moon and for a moment it is a different cultural space. It is about Islam and it’s actually quite beautiful. All of our spaces, the gardens, the stadium, all of these things should be accessible for anyone who is South African to feel that they are part of the urban reality.

Once you make that decision to love your space and place, only then can you start asking intelligent questions about an African architecture. Then the debate is how to do it. I still don’t know how to make an African architecture and it will probably take many more years. 

 

Design Indaba 10x10 Housing Project.

Luyanda: It’s an ongoing debate. Because it is not about African architecture per se, but also about understanding how African culture is evolving.

Mokena: YES!

 

Multistorey parkade at Cape Town International Airport by Luyanda Mpahlwa.

Luyanda: I just want to touch on a point you made about the Green Point stadium and the experience of the area. I take pride in the fact that I was among one of the few architects in Cape Town who supported the stadium being built in Green Point.

Mokena: I did too.

Luyanda: At a time when the whole city and soccer fraternity insisted that soccer is played in the townships, in Athlone and on the Cape Flats…

 

Multistorey parkade at Cape Town International Airport by Luyanda Mpahlwa.

 

Staircase detail at the South African embassy in Berlin by Luyanda Mpahlwa.

 

South African embassy in Berlin by Luyanda Mpahlwa.

 

Design Indaba 10x10 Housing Project.

Mokena: Yeah, it was like “take soccer to the people”.

Luyanda: Exactly. But some decisions about city-making actually require some very bold but well-motivated urban development considerations and thinking. Especially because I had been to Europe to learn about the FIFA World Cup and to the Caribbean to learn about the Cricket World Cup, my perspective was that stadiums today have become social integrators and icons from an urban planning and urban space-making point of view. To come back to your point, you should see what is happening in the urban park that surrounds the stadium. Although it also got a lot of criticism from the people of Cape Town, it has now become a place where the Muslim community don’t only come to watch the moon during Eid but actually come to the urban park every weekend.

I’ve just come back from Barcelona. When I first went to Rome I fell in love, but now having been to Barcelona, I feel even more of that. The simple reason is that there is romance in the air. Not because the city provides places where you can smooch or that there are statues by Leonardo da Vinci, but because the city has streets that are walkable. You go to these European cities and you find pedestrianised streets that are open air and have a variety of spaces, small and big.

Then you find that Barcelona has 1.5 million people. Cape Town’s got 3 million but only 50 000 are living in the city bowl, so where are the rest? I think this is what we’ve lost in our city-making process. We have lost this romantic association with the city, with the public spaces, with the fact that a city is walkable. It is only now after the World Cup that you are starting to see that there is a new energy in the city, with the urban parks and with the BRT. But many other things still need to happen. We have not reached the stage where we can say “Wow, this is a world capital”.

In fact, we’re both part of the bid committee for the World Design Capital and one of the things that we asked right at the beginning was what the things are that we can put across and say are design driven? Although the Design Indaba has positioned Cape Town as a place where designers come to, we now need to look at design intervention and identify those projects that are going to transform Cape Town through design. Design needs to be the thing that unlocks Cape Town, contributing to social integration and transforming the thinking. Bring the Cape Flats into the city. Bring the city into the Cape Flats. For me, it is through the process of starting to create those spaces that you can talk about love again.

 

Thusong Service Centre, a multipurpose facility in Khayelitsha by Mokena Makeka.

Mokena: What you’re saying resonates perfectly with some of the deficiencies that I have noticed. Think of New York where you buy that T-shirt with the big heart on it. It’s such an amazing place because it’s busy and it’s bustling but it still works at a neighbourhood scale. When people love their city the best ambassadors for the city are the citizens. When you travel and somebody asks where you are from, how many Capetonians say that Cape Town is the most amazing place and should definitely be visited? More people say they’re not so sure. A loving city takes care of its citizens and gives people choices, but it is also about being a fun city.

For too long, whether it is the result of apartheid planning or Calvinist approaches to government, there has been a very rational way of looking at cities. It was just about function, and I sometimes stop and wonder if that is part of the problem. If we really begin to tap into African culture and villages, villages are extremely fun places. There is so much interaction, there are things happening, it’s vibrant and people take care of each other.

I mean, I just finished the Cape Town Station project and it was a deliberate attempt of mine to make the square part of the public realm. But I was there yesterday taking photos and the security told me I couldn’t take photos. It is designed as a public place, it looks like a public place but its use is still privatised. Until we get to the point where our city is really fun for us, it won’t be fun for others. Like you had fun in Barcelona, surely part of the fun is to be there and see other people have fun. Vibrant cities and economically productive cities are the ones that understand culture.

 

Thusong Service Centre, a multipurpose facility in Khayelitsha, by Mokena Makeka.

 

Revamped interior of Cape Town Station by Mokena Makeka.  

Luyanda: Density plays a big role and one of the things that makes the African village idea work is that spaces are intimate. When I look at some of the attempts at dignified space in the townships of Cape Town, you see the creation of urban squares, which is the wrong urban design approach. The reason why squatter areas work is because they are dense, intimate and intense. They don’t want to open up into large spaces because people who come from a rural background, as most of the people in squatter areas do, like the intimacy of knowing your neighbour. People will create their own squares that are intimate. They won’t go to a big public square.

Mokena: Which is an Italian idea.

Luyanda: Exactly. You go into the townships and what you see there is everything but vibrant squares.

 

Revamped interior of Cape Town Station by Mokena Makeka. 

 

Mokena Makeka’s Public Transport Shared Services Centre in Athlone.

Aerial view of the public space in front of the newly revamped Cape Town Station, on which Mokena Makeka was the lead architect.

Mokena: And that is African design. That is an African decision.

Luyanda: You cannot take things that work in a certain culture and in a certain environment and think you are going to execute them in an environment that you don’t understand. One of the reasons why the urban park is successful is because it has lots of different spaces that you can choose from – spiritual gardens, herb gardens, a little amphitheatre, a water feature and so on. You find that, unlike in Kirstenbosch Gardens, kids play ball in the urban park. My kids were there with their bikes, others were J-boarding. This is a real park. It’s about creating lots of different environments rather than the gigantic, single kind of monocultural idea.

What we did in Freedom Park was to introduce a spiritual angle to our space making. Spiritual leaders were brought in to interpret some of the spaces and determine how to occupy those spaces. This comes back to our discussion about what it is that is African and understanding how African culture is evolving. Cape Town used to have a lot of Xhosa-speaking people, but there is also a growing Sotho community here and a large community of expats from other African countries who are occupying the inner city in particular. This is why the notion of an African architecture is something that can never be started and finished. It will continue evolving and it will be about how we continue to see it. And I’d like to end there.

Mokena: I also need to go in about five minutes. For me I am excited by the potential of this discourse; I believe that this journey is a fruitful one because there is an African sensibility that makes an African architecture possible. It is not purely for architecture’s sake but it is to give people dignity where currently there isn’t a sense of dignity. People believe that knowledge only comes from the “West” and that the “South” consumes knowledge. What we are doing now is building up the discourse. I would love to see where we are ten years from now in our respective practices because the work that we do will surely be studied internationally!

===== FILE: index_split_026.html =====

Table of Contents

Contents

Introduction

One on one: Saville raw – an intimate chat with the Factory Records art director

Sean O’Toole poses a few questions to Peter Saville and these are his pure, raw unedited answers.

One on one: Hyper designer – Naoto Fukasawa interviews Karim Rashid on product design and the future

One on one: A dedication to graphic design – Alexander Gelman interviews Michael Bierut

Conversation: Jurgen Bey and Richard Hart – product designer meets graphic designer

Conversation: KarlssonWilker and Stefan Sagmeister on their design studios

1 February 2011

Jan Wilker and Hjalti Karlsson of KarlssonWilker met while working for Stefan Sagmeister and now reunite as equals.

Conversation: Yves Béhar and Jens Martin Skibsted on design ideas and solutions

Conversation: Paula Scher and Dana Arnett on identity design and the digital era

Conversation: Milton Glaser and Massimo Vignelli – fathers of contemporary design

Conversation: Massimo Morozzi and Fernando Campana on “the future of design”

Conversation: Harry Pearce and Simon Sankarayya – life experience is more important than design theory

Conversation: Heath Nash and Hella Jongerius on craft in a contemporary context

Conversation: Fernando Gutiérrez and Ross Lovegrove on ways of working

Conversation: Paola Antonelli and Marion Nestle – designing food education and regulation

Inside Out: Admen Andrew Whitehouse and Matthew Bull move to NYC

Inside Out: Architect Don Albert and fashion designer Amanda Laird Cherry play on the world stage

Inside Out: Graphic designers Peet Pienaar and Heidi Chisholm look at Africa from abroad

Q&A: Stop waiting, start making – lessons in liveability from Jeanne van Heeswijk

Q&A: Clive Wilkinson – the social agenda of buildings

Q&A: Beyond Entropy Africa and Luanda the paradigm city

Conversation: Luyanda Mpahlwa and Mokena Makeka – creating an African architectural identity