Web
Typography
A handbook for designing beautiful and
effective responsive typography




Richard Rutter
Web
Typography
A handbook for designing beautiful and
effective responsive typography




by Richard Rutter

Ampersand Type
Brighton, UK
2017
ii   ﻿




     Web Typography
     by Richard Rutter

     Published in 2017 by Ampersand Type, Brighton, UK
     http://book.webtypography.net
     Please send errors to errata@webtypography.net

     Editor: Owen Gregory
     Design: Richard Rutter & David Rutter
     Compositor: David Rutter

     Headlines set in Ingeborg by Michael Hochleitner
     Body text set in Premiéra by Thomas Gabriel
     Captions set in Skolar Sans by David Březina

     Printed by Generation Press, Poynings, UK
     on Munken Polar Smooth.




     Copyright © 2017 Richard Rutter. All rights reserved.
     ISBN: 978-0-9956642-0-3
     A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library.
                                                                 Foreword    iii




Foreword
by Mark Boulton




What can I possibly say about typography that hasn’t been said
before? I could tell you that there is probably no design element
more important. Or that mastery of typographic design should
be first and foremost in a designer’s endeavours. I could tell you
that controlling how language is displayed controls how it is read
and perceived. Typography is really important.

But all that has been said before. The difference, of course, is that was
mostly said about typography in printed form, not of web typography.
No, web typography requires a slightly different outlook. Sure, typogra-
phy on the web requires the same attention to detail, and we employ a
similar arsenal of guidelines and principles to our print-based cousins.
But we do it on a different foundation: the web. An ever-changing, fluid,
dynamic system where users consume words on a plethora of devices and
web browsers. We must not just be comfortable with this chaos and lack
of control – we must embrace it. As you will read in this book, typography
on the web is familiar but subtly different. Our typography can never be
as exacting and precise as print, but using the teachings in this book, we
can create just as delightful reading experiences on the web.
    In 2007, Richard and I stood on a stage at South by Southwest Interac-
tive in Austin. A few months earlier, we had proposed a talk provocatively
titled ‘Web Typography Sucks’ with the hope of maybe being accepted
to speak to a few dozen typography nerds in one of the small rooms in
the enormous convention centre. To our great surprise, not only were we
to present in the largest hall at SXSW that year, but it was also packed.
Typography, it seemed, was as cool as Web 2.0. Now, a decade later, we
have almost as much typographic freedom and control on the web as we
do in other media. So much has changed. But does web typography still
suck? I’ll leave you to answer that, once you’ve read this book.
iv   How to use this book




     How to use
     this book

     This book was written as a practical guide and companion ref-
     erence for designers, developers and anyone else involved in the
     process of creating a website.


     Typography touches, and can be affected by, all people involved in the chain
     of events that leads to a website being conceived, designed, written, built
     and published. This means that if you’re an information architect, user
     experience designer, author, editor, project manager or client, this book
     is for you too.
         To get the most from this book you will benefit from some familiarity
     with the basics of HTML and CSS, but you will need no advanced knowl-
     edge of type and typography, so if you’re new to the field you’ll find this
     book accessible. A wise person once said that the best experts are keen on
     sharpening old saws and learning new tricks. This book provides enough
     in-depth detail that a seasonal professional will also find it useful.
         You can read this book from cover to cover as a complete guide to best
     practices in designing and implementing the typography of a website. You
     can also use this book as a reference to be dipped into for technical and
     aesthetic guidance, as and when the need arises.
         The book is divided into three parts: ‘Setting Type to be Read’, ‘Typo-
     graphic Detail’ and ‘Choosing and Using Fonts’. Each section is written as
     a series of guidelines. Take these not as rules but as guidance for making
     good decisions. Some lucky people have immaculate technique in their
     veins. The rest of us need instructional books like this to provide best prac-
     tices for us to follow as we hone our craft and develop our own instincts.
         The section on choosing typefaces is deliberately the final part of
     the book. Choosing a typeface is not typography. Before the advent of
     web fonts, typographic discipline online was scant. The source of this
     neglect was largely due to a resentment of the paucity of fonts available.
                                                                   How to use this book   v




This frustration was both unwarranted and misdirected. A typographer’s
 focus should be to make the very best of what is available. There will be
 times when, for whatever reason, the typefaces you have at your disposal
are not what you would ideally wish to use. Do not be disheartened by this
– treat it as a call to arms, a challenge to rise above what the typeface offers.
This book should show you that even very ordinary faces can be crafted
 into an engaging, absorbing typographic experience for your reader.
     During your process of designing a website you can follow the guide-
 lines in this book in order – it would certainly be a suitable way to learn
 the craft. This would leave the act of choosing a typeface until after you
 have designed all the essentials of a website. It is certainly possible to do
 that, but as with all design you should accept that a process of iteration
will be involved. The typeface you eventually choose will subtly (and occa-
 sionally greatly) influence many other parts of the design and the precise
 nature of the typography. That said, it is worth repeating: choosing a typeface
 is not typography; but if you have the choice, it’s an important aspect.


A few caveats
This book only explores the requirements of European written languages,
with a particular emphasis on the Latin alphabet and quite possibly an
unintentional bias towards English. Complex scripts, such as Arabic or
Devanagari, as well as logographic writing such as Hanzi or Kanji, are
not covered.
   As you might rightly guess for a book on web typography, this guide
covers a lot of HTML and CSS. One of the great aspects of CSS, and work-
ing on the web as whole, is that technologies are continually evolving. To
ensure that this remains relevant and accurate for as long as possible into
the future, all the CSS techniques mentioned in this book can be found in
W3C specifications and have at least some browser support (unless other-
wise stated). The progressive nature of the web means that there will be
more support in browsers now than when the text was written. Conse-
quently there is only occasional mention of which browsers do or don’t
support any particular CSS, and very few workarounds are detailed. The
open web is a far better place than a book to find up-to-date information
on browser support1 and shims or hacks.




1   For up to date information on browser support try Can I Use (http://wbtyp.net/61).
vi   How to use this book




     Typefaces versus fonts
     In general parlance the terms ‘typeface’ and ‘font’ can be used interchange-
     ably and anyone who admonishes you otherwise should be deemed a
     pedant. In almost all situations it is perfectly fine and comprehensible to
     say, ‘Gill Sans is a font’.
         That said, throughout this book the two terms are used to mean slightly
     different things. Typeface is always used to mean a font family – a collec-
     tion of fonts based on the same design (as in Gill Sans). The term font is
     mostly used to imply an individual style such as Gill Sans Bold Condensed.
     There may well be occasions when ‘font’ has been used to avoid repetition
     of ‘typeface’ – hopefully your reading experience will be improved by that
     small indulgence. Web font is used to mean a font file downloaded for the
     rendering of text in web pages.
vii
viii




       Contents

       We are all Typographers
       Why web typography really does matter   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
       Embracing the medium   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6
       Preparing the ground  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8



   1 Setting Type to be Read
       How we read  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  11
       The amazing em (and friends)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14
       Designing paragraphs: line length  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21
       Designing paragraphs: text size  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 26
       Designing paragraphs: line spacing  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 34
       Alignment, justification and hyphenation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 43
       Responsive paragraphs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 57



   2 Typographic Detail
       Symbols, signs and accents   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 67
       Ligatures and abbreviations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 78
       Hierarchy and scale  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 87
       Meaning and semantics  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 96
       Numerals and tables  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  119
       Tracking and kerning  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  145
       Headlines and impact  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 152
       Applying vertical rhythm  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  171
       Arrangement and composition  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 177
                                                                                                                                         ix




3 Choosing and Using Fonts
 How fonts render on screens   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  195
 Practical and pragmatic considerations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 203
 Knowing and browsing type  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 209
 Selecting typefaces for body text  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 237
 Choosing typefaces for display  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 246
 Choosing typefaces for functional text  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 256
 Combining typefaces   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 262
 Using web fonts   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 269
 Building a library  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 285



 Final Thoughts
 Communicating your design   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  291
 If you read nothing else, read this   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 294



 Appen­dices
 Glossary   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 303
 Bibliography and further reading  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 314
 CSS index  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 325
 Thank you  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 327
§ We are all
  Typographers




 • Why web typography really does matter
 • Embracing the medium
 • Preparing the ground
    ¶ CSS was born of typography.
If you design websites or use CSS then
you are making typographic decisions
      whether you know it or not.
3   Why web typography really does matter




    Why web
    typography really
    does matter

    Typography on the web matters because typography matters.
    Typography is what comes between the author and the reader.
    If a text has anything at all significant to say, it needs a typogra-
    pher’s care, which will in turn be repaid by the reader’s attention.


    The majority of content on the web consists of words. If our web of words
    is to be read, and for that reading experience to be good – to be elevated
    from poor, past satisfactory, to great – then it’s the details that will count.
    That’s what typography itself is all about: the little details adding up to
    something greater than the sum of the parts.
        In 2006, the designer Oliver Reichenstein presented web designers with
    a call to arms. He notoriously wrote that ‘web design is 95% typography’ 1.
    He based this on the supposition that 95% of the information on the web is
    written language, leading to his assertion that every web designer should
    get good training in the main discipline of shaping written information:
    that is, typography.
        Whether or not 95% is a true figure, it is indisputable that much of the
    web is intended for reading: customer reviews, charity campaigns, indus-
    try reports, social network updates, blog posts, newspapers, magazines,
    books, wikis, email, and far more besides. It’s also clear that much of the
    written web is designed with the same uninspiring, uninviting, unreadable
    uniformity. This needn’t be so, and among the purposes of this book are
    to show how, and provide some of the training called for by Reichenstein.


    1   ‘Web Design is 95% Typography’ (http://wbtyp.net/28) by Oliver Reichenstein on
        iA.net (2006).
                                                   Why web typography really does matter   4




The job of typography
The revered type designer Hermann Zapf said that, for designers, ‘typo-
graphic design is sometimes misconstrued as a form of private self-ex-
pression’ 2. Typography is not art – it is craft and design with purpose. It is
there to perform a service for the reader. Quoting another great designer,
Emil Ruder said in 1969 3:

    Typography has one plain duty before it and that is to convey information in
    writing. No argument or consideration can absolve typography from this duty.
    A printed work which cannot be read becomes a product without purpose.

A website which cannot be read is a product without purpose. Typography’s
chief role is to ensure legibility and readability, but that is not its only job.
Typography should invite the reader into the text. It should honour and
enhance the tone and message, and clarify the structure and relationships
with other elements. Typography should create the ideal conditions for
consuming the text, be it immersive reading, scanning for information, or
somewhere in between.


Good typography induces a good mood
Typography has a direct, visceral influence on the reader. As well as the
practical service of enabling readers to understand and absorb the text, it
demonstrably affects their emotional and physical state in ways that few
other forms of communication can.
   In 2005, a report4 entitled ‘The Aesthetics of Reading’ was published by
Dr Rosalind W. Picard of MIT, and Dr Kevin Larson, a cognitive psychologist
on staff at Microsoft. This publication detailed research which revealed
that while typographic quality has little measurable effect on reading speed
and comprehension, ‘good quality typography is responsible for greater
engagement during reading’.
   The research showed that while the quality of typography didn’t neces-
sarily have an impact on the actual reading speed, it did have a measurable
effect on the perceived reading speed. With good typography, participants
significantly underestimated the time taken to read a passage. There was

2   Zapf quoted on the cover of Robert Bringhurst’s The Elements of Typographic Style.
3   Typography: A Manual of Design by Emil Ruder (1967).
4   ‘The Aesthetics of Reading’ PDF (http://wbtyp.net/22) by Kevin Larson &
    Rosalind W. Picard (2005).
5   Why web typography really does matter




    also ‘reduced activation in the corrugator muscle’ with better typography,
    which in plain English means readers frowned less. These combined fac-
    tors led scientists to conclude that ‘good typography induces a good mood’.
       Until recently, the only evidence in favour of spending time and energy
    on good typography was our own empirical sense of design and aesthetic,
    combined with the weight of history and inherited typographic wisdom.
    Now there is a whole new wave of psychologists and typographers doing
    serious peer-reviewed experimental research on the effects of good typog-
    raphy and type design. For the most part, it is evident the old masters were
    right all along.
                                                          Embracing the medium    6




Embracing the
medium

The web is often described as a medium, but it is no more a
medium than ink. To be a medium, ink must be combined with
paper and a process of imprinting letters, otherwise ink is merely
a means of transporting pigment. Similarly, the web is merely
means of transporting data and structuring ideas. It is only when
these meet a combination of software and hardware that we have
a medium for design. But unlike all written material before it,
that medium is under the control and influence of the reader.

When the World Wide Web was launched over twenty years ago, web pages
had no design component. Web sites consisted of linked documents loosely
structured by the hypertext markup language (HTML) inherent and unique
to the web. This, as now, defined parts of the document as headings, par-
agraphs, lists, citations, quotations, emphasis, code samples, and so forth.
It was left up to the reader’s browser software to determine how these ele-
ments would look on their screen or other hardware.
    The web is arguably the best medium for text there has ever been.
Readers can adjust the medium to their advantage or when affected by
the external environment. From the beginnings of the web, the reader has
been able to tweak the display of text to their own satisfaction, be it colour,
size or font choice (albeit initially limited to those typefaces installed on
their computer).
    Five years after the launch of the web, cascading style sheets (CSS) were
introduced as a way of applying a presentation layer to web pages, and it’s
where all a web typographer’s typesetting is applied. CSS is a layer that can
be peeled away, in part or in whole; and it’s a layer, not of definitive design
directions, but of guidelines, hints and nudges.
7   Embracing the medium




    Learn to relinquish control
    Designing websites is a strange and wonderful thing. Since the invention
    of the printing press, designers and printers have decided on the stock, the
    dimensions and layout of the page, the choice of typeface and the size of
    font. As the scale of print runs increased, these decisions may have become
    based on commercial as well as aesthetic concerns, but aside from very
    wealthy and demanding individuals, the reader will have had no direct
    influence on the medium or the typographic design.
         With the web, the opposite is true. The designer has no direct influence
    on the reader’s medium. Not only can the designer not change their read-
    er’s hardware or software, the reader can override completely any directions
    the designer might send along with the content. This is as it should be.
    It’s what makes the web special.
         Where a print designer is all-powerful, dictating every aspect of the
    reading experience, the web designer must know to relinquish control into
    the hands of the reader and not fool themselves into believing the situation
    is otherwise. In one of the most important writings1 on web design, John
    Allsopp used an extract from Tao Te Ching to make this point beautifully:

        “The sage … accepts the ebb and flow of things,
         Nurtures them, but does not own them”

    The wonderful thing about the web is that it takes many forms and those
    forms can be shaped by the reader to their benefit. That is a strength not
    a weakness, a feature not a bug. The control which print designers have –
    and so often desire when they transition to the web – is a limitation of the
    printed medium. The output dictated by print designers, often with great
    skill and the reader’s best interests at heart, is inherently a one-size-fits-all
    solution. It may not suit the short-sighted reader resorting to a magnify-
    ing glass, or work well for the commuter struggling on a busy train with
    a broadsheet. Web designers, then, must be flexible. Their designs must
    adapt to the environment of the reader, and the reader must be allowed to
    adapt the design to best fit their needs.




    1    ‘A Dao of Web Design’ (http://wbtyp.net/6) by John Allsop in A List Apart (2000).
                                                                 Preparing the ground   8




Preparing the
ground

Before beginning any typographic design, get to know the content,
the subject matter and the tone.

If you are to do justice to the text and serve your reader well, do your research.
Talk to your client, the writers, design researchers, user experience design-
ers, information architects, content strategists and anyone else who can
give you a full picture of what you are about to design.


Know what you are designing and for whom
If it is at all practical, read the text in full. Failing that, invest a good deal of
time in reading representative content. If that’s not possible, you must still
get to grips with what the text might be before designing it. Understanding
the tenor is as important as addressing the structure and topic.
     Find out who your readers are likely to be. Ask about their demographics,
devices and context – when and where might they be reading?

Honour the text, don’t dominate it
The reason you should know your readership and understand the text you
are setting is so you can design specifically for them. Avoid design for
design’s sake and, worse still, avoid designing to fashion. Trends are harder
to bypass as they creep up on us, and in hindsight can define the life and
time in which we worked. Be wary of succumbing to their lure and falling
into the trap of being on-trend.
    Good typography should do its job and disappear. Make your setting
fit and enhance the meaning of the text and the words will shine through.
Don’t design the page beautiful and attempt to fit the text into it. You are
a slave to the text, not its master.
1 Setting Type
   to be Read




 • How we read
 • The amazing em (and friends)
 • Designing paragraphs: line length
 • Designing paragraphs: text size
 • Designing paragraphs: line spacing
 • Alignment, justification and hyphenation
 • Responsive paragraphs
¶ The vast majority of the web is text,
and a website which cannot be read is
a product without purpose. You should
 strive to make the reading experience
           as good as possible.
11   How we read




     How we read

     Typography is not about designing an environment for optimum
     reading speed, retention or even comprehension. Typography
     is about designing an inviting, comfortable reading experience.
     To do this, we first need to know how people actually read.


     Broadly speaking, a piece of text will serve one of three purposes. The first is
     display text, used to grab attention and set a mood. It is intended initially for
     looking at. The second type is reference text, used for consulting and providing
     discrete pieces of information. Examples include glossaries, listings, data
     tables and search results. The third kind is linear text, intended for continu-
     ous reading, such as books, news articles and product descriptions. We will
     cover the first two types of text in detail later in the book, but for now we
     will focus our attention on linear text as this is where the reading experience
     must be at its most comfortable and inviting.
         Readers approach linear text on the web in a number of different ways.
     People skim read, casting their eye over text, reading words and sentences
     here and there to get a sense of the content. People also scan with purpose,
     jumping from section to section, looking for a particular piece of informa-
     tion. In doing so they might skim headings and glance at chunks of sen-
     tences. Finally, people read in an engaged manner once they find a passage
     or entire page they are interested in. Readers will slow down and consume
     the whole text, becoming immersed in the words.
         The immersive flow state is the ultimate condition for your reader to
     reach. Aim for them to be absorbed by the text, unaware of their surround-
     ings, with time flying by unnoticed as the words consume them.
         Only engaging writing will result in this state of immersion, but good
     typography can help your reader achieve it. More importantly, bad typogra-
     phy can prevent your reader reaching flow. Our job is to respect both reader
     and writer, by providing the typographic conditions for immersive flow to
     occur. Designing for immersion is what we will concentrate on in the first
     section of this book.
                                                                                      How we read     12




We read in hops, skips and jumps… and pauses
When we read linear text, we don’t do so in a smooth linear manner. The
lenses in our eyes can only focus with total acuity on a tiny section in our
field of vision. This is known as foveal vision. Everything outside the centre
of our vision gets more out of focus the nearer it is to the periphery. Because
only a small part of our vision is sharply in focus, our eyes can only register
a few letters at a time.




    We can only see four to ﬁve letters at a time with complete acuity




We can only see four to five letters at a time with complete acuity; however, the brain assumes all
the text is in focus.


Foveal vision makes us read by skipping our eyes along lines of text in quick
movements called saccades. Between each saccade we pause long enough to
see the characters on the page clearly, and as we do so, we fixate very briefly
on the letters within words, and occasionally the spaces between them.




         Foveal vision makes us read by skipping our eyes along


         lines of text in quick movements called saccades.

Circles show where we fixate, arrows show where our eyes jump. Note our eyes sometimes jump
back to verify.


As soon as our brain recognises a group of letters, our eyes move on; mean-
while, our brain puts the letters together and searches for word matches.
The brain tries to guess ahead but sometimes sends the eyes back to con-
firm it got the word right. When we get to the end of a line, our eyes break
13   How we read




     off and jump in one big saccade, rejoining the text at the beginning of the
     next line.
          When we learn to read, our initial attention is on processing individ-
     ual words, translating graphemes (spelling patterns) out loud into their
     corresponding phonemes (spoken sounds). As we become competent at
     reading out loud, we’re encouraged to read silently. As we become more
     experienced at reading to ourselves, we begin to develop the ability to
     follow text in saccades and fixations rather than word to word.
         For competent readers, these mechanisms happen extremely quickly
     and subconsciously. Just as we rarely notice when we blink, nor see the
     individual frames of a film, so it is we don’t notice the blurred letters, sac-
     cades or fixations. It’s a smooth, seamless process. The duration of the fix-
     ations and the size of the saccades can vary, though. These depend on our
     proficiency as readers and our familiarity with the subject matter. They
     can also be hugely affected by the setting of the text, from the choice of
     typeface to the spacing between the letters, words and lines.
          When designing text to keep your reader immersed, the key is to help
     your reader’s eyes move along the current line with as little back-pedalling
     as possible, and – most importantly – make an accurate jump to the begin-
     ning of the following line. You need to gently guide their gaze across the
     screen and deftly point them onwards and downwards.
         This highlights the difference between readability and legibility. Read-
     ability, which we are currently concerning ourselves with, is the level of
     comprehension and visual comfort when reading typeset material. Legibility
     refers to the clarity of individual characters and how easily they are deci-
     phered. Legibility belongs to type designers more than web designers, but
     can be affected by typesetting.
         Arranging type well on whatever constitutes a page is the main under-
     taking of the typographer designing for readability. However, it is far from
     the only concern of the web designer. The printed page works by light
     reflecting off the paper and into our eyes. So long as there is enough light
     to reflect, paper will work just as well wherever the reader is. For some-
     one reading the web, their page is far more likely to be emitting light from
     little dots through a slab of glass, and that can be problematic. Bright lights,
     darkened rooms, sunlight, reflections; low resolutions, tiny screens, giant
     screens, distant screens; vibrations, low bandwidths and slow processors;
     all of these conspire against your reader. To make type truly readable and
     bring about a state of repose, we must make our typography perform as well
     as it can in all situations, and this will be our fundamental consideration
     throughout the book.
                                                                 The amazing em (and friends)   14




The amazing em
(and friends)

The web has always been a type-based medium. Cascading style
sheets joined HTML as a part of the web in 1996, and did so with
typographic foundations from their inception. The principal
underpinning those foundations is the em unit.


The beauty of the em in CSS is that it provides a unit of length which relates
directly to font size. Ems are indispensable to modern web design. As you
will see throughout this book, ems enable us to design truly scalable web
pages, which is why we are introducing them before going any further.
    Ems have a long-standing tradition in typography, where they have
typically been used for horizontal measurements. Ems are named after the
letter M (pronounced as you would the letter), but are not directly related
to the character itself. It is more likely the em was derived from the width
of the metal sort which held a capital M in moveable type printing presses.




Some metal type sorts (mirrored for clarity). © Barbara Hauser
15   The amazing em (and friends)




     In CSS, the em is a general unit of length related directly to font size. We
     use it to define widths, heights, padding, margins and other measurements
     in both horizontal and vertical directions – something typographers with a
     traditional background may find surprising. The em unit can also be used
     to define the font size itself.
         The relationship between ems and font size is the same on the web as it
     is in traditional printed typography. It’s very simple: one em is a distance
     equal to the font size. If the font size of an element (<body>, <div>, <h1>,
     <p>, <span>, and so on) is 16 pixels then one em is equivalent to 16 pixels;
     in an element with 36-pixel type, one em equals 36 pixels; and for 120-pixel
     type one em is 120 pixels.
         Just as in traditional typography, a crucial aspect of the relationship
     between ems and font size is that it is independent of the font’s design.
     One em equals the font size whether the typeface is an elaborate calligra-
     phic script, Japanese kanji, or a plain sans serif. To illustrate the relation-
     ship between length and font size, consider these styles:

        #box1 {
           font-size: 36px;
           width: 1em;
           height: 1em;

        #box2 {
           font-size: 120px;
           width: 1em;
           height: 1em;
        }

     These styles will render
     like this:




                                    and

     Both boxes have a height and width of 1 em, but because they have different
     font sizes, one box is bigger than the other. Box 1 has a font-size of 36 px so
     its width and height is also 36 px; the text of box 2 is set to 120 px and so its
     width and height are 120 px.
                                                      The amazing em (and friends)   16




The fundamental advantage of using ems is that distances, lengths and
spaces will all scale proportionately with text size. If your reader adjusts
their default text size to better suit their requirements, everything sized
in ems adjusts itself accordingly. This effect is particularly useful when
relationships between elements on the page are tied to type size; margins
and padding, for example.
   As we saw above, lengths set in ems are relative to the font size of the
selected element. However, when setting font-size in ems, we do so rel-
ative to the inherited font size; that is, the font size of the element’s parent.
Consider the following markup:

   <div id="d1">
      <p>…</p>
   </div>
   <div id="d2">
      <p>…</p>
   </div>

with the following styles applied:

   #d1 { font-size: 16px; }
   #d2 { font-size: 32px; }
   p { font-size: 1em; }

These will render as:


   #d1   This paragraph has font-size set to 1 em and inherits a font-size of 16 px from its
         parent <div>.


   #d2
         This paragraph has font-size set to 1 em
         and inherits a font-size of 32 px from its
         parent <div>.

Even though both paragraphs have font-size:1em they display different
text sizes because their parent elements have text sized differently.
                       17   The amazing em (and friends)




                            Rem units
  In web pages, the         The rem unit was introduced to CSS3 in 2005. It is similar to the em in that
 <html> element is          it lets you set lengths relative to font size. The key difference is that rems
known as the root.
Which is what the r         are not relative to a selected element’s font size; they are always relative
  in rem stands for.        to the root <html> element. By extension, this means that rems are always
                            directly related to the browser’s default text size, which can be adjusted by
                            the reader. This gives us additional precision and ease of use, while still
                            ceding ultimate control to our reader.
                                If a browser’s default text size is 16 px then 1 rem is always 16 px, regard-
                            less of where a selected element might sit in the page or what its context
                            might be. If your reader changes their default text size to 21 px, then 1 rem
                            will always be 21 px. Let’s take our previous example and set the paragraph
                            font size in rems instead of ems:

                               #d1 { font-size: 16px; }
                               #d2 { font-size: 32px; }
                               p { font-size: 1rem; }

                            These will render as:


 #d1     This paragraph has font-size set to 1 rem so it does not inherit the font size
         from its parent <div>.


 #d2     This paragraph has font-size set to 1 rem so it does not inherit the font size
         from its parent <div>.



                            Use rems for global sizing; use ems for local sizing
                            In ems and rems we have two extremely useful and versatile units which
                            enable us to relate lengths, distances and dimensions to font size. Unfor-
                            tunately, it is not always obvious when it’s better to use one rather than
                            the other. We’ll be using both rems and ems throughout this book so the
                            advantages of each unit will become clear, but as a guideline, use rems to
                            scale something with the page (global sizing) and use ems to scale within
                            a component (local sizing).
                               Take the example of a pull-quote containing two short paragraphs.
                            The spacing between the paragraphs will depend on the size of the para-
                            graph text, so you could feasibly set that spacing in either rems or ems.
                                                                   The amazing em (and friends)     18




Should you decide during your design process that the pull-quote should
be set a bit larger, then the spacing between the paragraphs must also be
increased. Therefore, the paragraph spacing is directly related to the para-
graph text size and should be considered as local sizing within a component.
Hence, you should use ems in this case.
   As for the paragraph text itself, that does not have any direct relation
to another part of the page. It is only related directly to the default text size.
Therefore, the paragraph text size can be considered to be global sizing and
thus should be set in rems rather than ems. We will examine text sizing in
much more detail later on.


Ch units
The ch unit was introduced in CSS3 in 2006. It is equivalent to the width
of a character, hence ch. More specifically, 1 ch equals the width of the zero
(0) character in the current font. This means that unlike ems and rems,
which do not change with different type designs, a ch changes as the font
family changes. In cases where it is impossible or impractical for browsers
to determine the width of a 0 (perhaps because the font doesn’t include
such a glyph), browsers will set 1 ch to be equal to 0.5 em.



    Typography Should Be Invisible
    Typography demands a humility of mind, for
    the lack of which many of the fine arts are
    even now floundering in self-conscious and
    maudlin experiments. There is nothing simple
    or dull in achieving the transparent page.


    Typography Should Be Invisible
    Typography demands a humility of mind, for
    the lack of which many of the fine arts are
    even now floundering in self-conscious and
    maudlin experiments. There is nothing simple
    or dull in achieving the transparent page.

Two text blocks are set to 34 ch wide, but the use of a condensed font (top) and an expanded font
(bottom) makes the rendered width narrower and wider respectively.
                    19   The amazing em (and friends)




                         The ch unit can be useful if you want to set lengths or sizes that relate
                         directly to the width of the font. For example, you might want to set the
                         width of a block of text to be wider for an expanded font, and narrower for
                         a condensed font. Using ch could achieve this automatically for you. In
                         the preceding example, both text blocks have a width of 34 ch, but because
                         they use fonts of different widths, the blocks are different sizes.
                            CSS includes many more units of length: you may have noticed we’ve
                         omitted to mention pixels at this point, and there are plenty of others we
                         haven’t yet touched on: 1 ex, for example, is a length equal to the current
                         font’s x-height.
                            Nevertheless, em, rem and, to a lesser extent, their cousin ch provide us
                         with the primary tools for designing and developing websites that bend,
                         squash, stretch and – most importantly – adapt to the requirements of our
                         readers and their web-enabled devices.


                         A pixel is not a pixel
                         It used to be the case that a pixel was the smallest unit in web design and
                         considered indivisible. This was because a pixel was the tiniest dot any
                         computer screen was capable of displaying. We now know these more spe-
                         cifically as hardware pixels.
    Subpixels are the        For many years, screen resolutions remained reasonably static. One
 red, green and blue     pixel rendered on a screen could fairly reliably be measured as being 1/96
dots which comprise
 a hardware pixel on     of an inch across (96 ppi). Pixels were hardware pixels and this served us
      an LCD screen.     well, even when LCD screens became more commonplace and subpixels
                         were able to be used for text smoothing and graphics rendering.
                             The situation all changed with the advent of very high-resolution
                         smartphone screens, popularised by Apple’s double-density Retina dis-
                         plays. The first iPhones had 3½" screens with a resolution of 320 × 480. The
                         resulting 163 ppi was close enough to the more usual 96 ppi for pixels to
                         still be hardware pixels. In other words, 16 px text would be rendered 16
                         physical pixels tall just like on any other screen.
                             When the iPhone 4 was introduced, however, it too had a 3½" screen
                         but with a resolution of 640 × 960, resulting in 326 ppi. This meant if 16 px
                         text was rendered using 16 physical pixels it would be half the size of the
                         same text on an earlier iPhone. Clearly this would have been an untena-
                         ble situation for both reader and designer, so the definition of a pixel was
                         changed in CSS2. Where pixels used to be hardware pixels they are now
                         reference pixels.
                                                            The amazing em (and friends)    20




The official, somewhat impenetrable definition in the specification1 is:

    The reference pixel is the visual angle of one pixel on a device with a
    pixel density of 96 dpi and a distance from the reader of an arm’s length.
    For a nominal arm’s length of 28 inches, the visual angle is therefore
    about 0.0213 degrees. For reading at arm’s length, 1 px thus corresponds
    to about 0.26 mm (1/96 inch).

At it simplest, this means that pixels in CSS are no longer individual physi-
cal picture elements – the smallest dots a screen can produce – but a meas-
ure of distance equal to 1/96 of an inch. Old displays, therefore, adhere to
the new specification (by definition, each pixel on a low-tech 96 ppi screen
will be 1/96" across), and higher-resolution screens should try to make CSS
pixels that same size.
    The upshot is that an iPhone with a Retina display renders 16 px text
at exactly the same size as older iPhones with low-resolution displays. By
extension, an iPhone 4 also reports its screen resolution to be 320×480, even
though there are 640 × 960 actual pixels built into the display. We call this
the logical resolution. The same applies to newer iPhones and other very
high-resolution screens.
    There is, however, a complication in the definition of a reference pixel
which leads to inconsistency in the way it is interpreted. A CSS pixel is
defined as being 1/96" on a screen held at arm’s length. This implies that refer-
ence pixels on a screen held closer to the face should be smaller than 1/96",
and pixels on a screen further away than arm’s length should be bigger
than that. This makes sense but adds subjectivity in the way devices render
CSS pixels and how they report their logical resolutions2.
    CSS pixels rendered on double-density screens vary between manufac-
turers and models. On most mobile devices, reference pixels are almost
always smaller than 1/96". Phones are held closer than arm’s length so
this fits the specification – but the range in rendered size is somewhere
between 1/110" and 1/150". The variation is even greater across tablets and
mini-tablets. While you’ll have a vague idea, then, you’ll never quite know
exactly how big a pixel actually will be, even with software rather than
hardware determining its size.



1   ‘Absolute Lengths’ in CSS Values and Units Module Level 3 (http://wbtyp.net/103).
2   For more detail on logical resolutions see ‘The Ultimate Guide To iPhone Resolutions’
    (http://wbtyp.net/26) from PaintCode.
21   Designing paragraphs: line length




     Designing
     paragraphs:
     line length
     A paragraph represents an individual unit of thought. From a
     typographer’s point of view, a paragraph is the shortest passage of
     text which we should design for immersive reading. Your reader
     should be able to absorb the writer’s thoughts without difficulty
     or interruption.

     Immersive reading is the most intense and involving form of reading. The
     paragraph is an ideal place to start when designing the typography of your
     website. Making a paragraph readable is about helping your reader’s eyes
     stay on the line they are currently following, pass along it with as little
     back-and-forth as possible, and when they reach the end of the line, reat-
     tach effortlessly to the next one.
        Three factors combine to make a paragraph readable: the triumvirate of
     line spacing, measure and text size. Think of them as legs on a three-legged
     stool – you’ll upset the balance if you change one leg without adjusting
     the others.



                       Readability


                      Line spacing
                                                                         Text size
                           Measure



     Readability balances on a stool with legs of line spacing, measure and text size.
                                                        Designing paragraphs: line length   22




Of the three legs, measure is the best place to start as it has the greatest
influence on your reader’s ability to go from line to line.


Choose a comfortable measure
Measure is a typographer’s term for the length of a line of text. Web design-
ers might describe this as the width of a paragraph. If left unchecked, meas-
ure is the factor which can vary most in a web context and thus have the
greatest effect on readability.
    If you set your lines too long, your reader will have difficulty in follow-
ing from one line to the next; they may mistakenly skip lines or reread the
same line. Set your measure too short and your reader’s eyes will have to
change direction too frequently, resulting in tired eyes and a reading expe-
rience that feels like hard work, however engaging the text.

Lean on six centuries of typesetting experience
The often quoted ideal length for a line is 66 characters, with a range
of 45 – 75 characters (including spaces) generally considered satisfactory.
Rather than representing a predefined guideline, these figures reflect the
de facto habits of master printers and typesetters since the invention of
the moveable type printing press nearly six hundred years ago. In fact,
as Geoffrey Dowding put it in Finer Points in the Spacing and Arrangement of
Type in 1966:

    The first printers inherited what was, and had been for centuries, the
    accepted usage of the scribe: and the best of our contemporary printers
    adhere to this for the eminently practical reason that its observance still
    produces the most readable and craftsmanlike work.

The implication is that any book, newspaper or other reading material
printed in the last few centuries is likely to be set with lines containing
between 45 and 75 characters.
   That said, we established in ‘How we read’ that reading screens is differ-
ent from reading from paper. The very limited amount of research1 that has
been undertaken on reading from screens indicates that longer line lengths
(up to 100 characters) do not adversely affect readability, and can in fact
increase the speed of reading. The temptation, therefore, might be to use


1   ‘How physical text layout affects reading from screen’ (http://wbtyp.net/14) by
    M. C. Dyson in Behaviour and Information Technology 23/6 (2004).
23   Designing paragraphs: line length




     longer lines on screens. However, the same studies revealed that readers
     stated a preference for shorter lines. This is an important finding. Readability
     is as much about setting text that wants to be read, as it is about setting text
     that can be read quickly and easily.
         It leads us back to our history and the six centuries of print typography
     that have come before us: aim for setting paragraphs 45 – 75 characters wide,
     just as was being done on vellum all those years ago. Remember, though,
     that this range is an observation, not a mandate, so a little either side – for
     good reason – won’t do any harm.


     Set text for mobile first
     All modern web designers are taught to think mobile first. That is to say,
     your starting point of any design consideration should be for small screens
     and less capable devices. This applies just as much to the typography as it
     does to any other aspect of web design, so let’s take our paragraph and put
     it in the context of a smartphone.




         The first printers inherited what was, and
         had been for centuries, the accepted
         usage of the scribe: and the best of our
         contemporary printers adhere to this for
         the eminently practical reason that its
         observance still produces the most            42 characters per line is
         readable and craftsmanlike work.              just about satisfactory.




     As you can see, on a small screen, such as a typical smartphone, you will
      usually fit around 40 characters per line, assuming the default text size and
      typeface. This is just below the lower end of the range for a satisfactory
      line length, so you certainly wouldn’t want it shorter.
          You could fit more characters on a line by reducing the size of the text,
      but the standard text size of any device will normally have been set by
      the manufacturer to be what they consider comfortable for the majority
      of their customers, so it’s best leaving the default as the starting point for
      your paragraphs. We’ll discuss potential refinements to this guideline in
     ‘Designing paragraphs: text size’.
                                                                   Designing paragraphs: line length           24




Use a liquid setting
On larger screens, lines of text will be longer unless you do something to
stop that happening. Here, for example, you can see the lines are around
135 characters long:




 The first printers inherited what was, and had been for centuries, the accepted usage of the scribe: and the best of our contemporary
 printers adhere to this for the eminently practical reason that its observance still produces the most readable and craftsmanlike work.




135 characters per line is too long for comfortable reading.


The lines are clearly far too wide for a good reading experience. We need
to shorten them to keep them within our ideal range of 45 – 75 characters.
    In CSS we don’t have characters as a consistent unit of length. The ch
unit we introduced in the chapter ‘The amazing em (and friends)’ is equal
to the width of a character. However, this varies from font to font so it’s not
usually suitable for layout purposes as it doesn’t offer the consistency we’d
need. We can, though, use the em unit instead. One em is roughly equal to
two characters, so to achieve a width of 45 – 75 characters, our paragraphs
should be set to the equivalent range of 23 – 38 ems.
    Thinking in terms of a range rather than an absolute figure such as
33 ems is extremely helpful when considering designs that can adapt to dif-
ferent screen sizes. It means your design can be far less opinionated about
the size of the browser window, which is good for your reader. Your design
will mould itself to the size and shape of your reader’s chosen device, as
opposed to their device attempting to crowbar your design into its screen.



    This line has sixty six characters, counting both letters and spaces.
    It is about 32 ems long and suitable for long-term reading with text
    set in paragraphs. On average, 1 em accounts for two characters, so a
    satisfactory line length (also known as the measure) is 22 to 38 ems.


    M                             M                              M                             M


66 characters is about 32 ems.
25     Designing paragraphs: line length




       The easiest way to restrict the width of your paragraphs to the top end of
       the readable range is to set a max-width on the paragraph:

           p { max-width: 38em; }

       This rule means paragraphs will still fill the whole width of smaller screens,
       but in larger windows lines will never be longer than 38 ems – the upper
       limit of our range. As an additional nicety, you can centre the column of
       text by adding margin:auto.




     The first printers inherited what was, and had been for centuries, the accepted
     usage of the scribe: and the best of our contemporary printers adhere to this
     for the eminently practical reason that its observance still produces the most
     readable and craftsmanlike work.




       Lines centred and limited to 38 ems long.


       The important thing to note here is that we are not setting a width for the para-
       graph. We are letting the lines of text vary in length according to the view-
       port (the screen size or browser window), and stopping the lines becoming
       too long where necessary, based on the number of characters in the line.
       This technique is known as liquid or fluid layout, and ensures your typeset-
       ting is independent of – and adapts to – your reader’s device. Fluid layouts
       are the very essence of the web typographer’s craft. Next, we’ll learn how
       to bring text size into the equation.
                                                        Designing paragraphs: text size   26




Designing
paragraphs:
text size

Text size is the second leg of the readability stool. Start with
a size suitable for comfortable reading, which could vary with
your choice of typeface and the distance of the screen from your
reader’s eyes.


Use the default font size for paragraphs
Your starting point for paragraph text should be whatever size has been set
as the default in the browser. Device manufacturers will have determined
an appropriate initial size, usually 16 px. Be aware that your reader may
have adjusted the default size to better suit their needs. You should respect
your reader’s wishes – if they’ve gone to the effort of adjusting the font size
(especially the browser default) it will be for a good reason.




Some people set their default text very large indeed.
27   Designing paragraphs: text size




     Many designers, especially those new to the web, are surprised at how large
     the default text size is on screen compared with printed material. But this
     comparison only holds up if you compare the two media side by side. We
     tend to read screens from further away than the distance at which we hold
     books, newspapers or magazines, so the perceived screen and print text
     sizes are actually similar.
         Your inner designer may err towards smaller text, but from your read-
     er’s perspective it is safer to make the text a little too big than too small.
     It is true that your reader can adjust the size of text within their browsers,
     but that’s no excuse for setting type too small in the first place. Why make
     them go through the effort of correcting the type size? You’re the typog-
     rapher – it’s your job to set the type correctly, and the default is the size at
     which browsers were intended to display text.

     Take small print into account
     You should consider whether the text you are designing is likely to include
     long passages set smaller than your regular body text. Examples of this
     include small print, annotations and comments.
         You may not yet have decided whether your small print should actually
     be set in a smaller size, but now’s the time to start thinking about the pos-
     sibility. Your small print will need to be differentiated from your regular
     text, but if dropping down a text size means your small print becomes
     illegible, you’ll need to bump up its size a bit and increase the body text
     to accommodate it.

     Reversed-out text
     Be aware that light text set on a dark background can often do with being
     set a little bigger, particularly when viewed on lower-resolution screens.
     Experiment to see what works for you.


     Adjust the font size if the typeface requires it
     The browser default is always the best place to start for text size. However,
     typefaces can vary significantly – even among ones suitable for continu-
     ous reading – and your choice of typeface may require you to adjust your
     paragraph text size up or down from the default.
        Some fonts are simply smaller owing to the way they were built. Often
     these are fonts which were designed from the start with heavily accented
     characters or the need to accommodate non-Latin scripts such as Arabic.
                                                        Designing paragraphs: text size   28




A good example of this is Calibri, which contains the character Ǻ, a rarely
used double-accented Danish glyph. It is an extremely tall character and, to
fit the diacritics into the font’s vertical metrics, Calibri is built with smaller
letters compared to similar typefaces.




                                            Helvetica’s (left) is drawn bigger than
                                            Calibri (right). Here the glyphs are
                                            set at the same font size, despite
                                            appearances to the contrary.



Calibri’s capital letters are about 10% shorter than the version of Helvetica
included in macOS, so to achieve parity with Helvetica at a typical default
of 16 px, you should set Calibri at 18 px.




                                            Helvetica set at 16 px compared with
                                            Calibri at 18 px (magnified).




Fonts smaller (or bigger) by design
A given typeface may appear smaller or bigger compared with another,
despite the two fonts being constructed with similar vertical metrics. It
is the design of the typefaces that makes them look different sizes, rather
than the way they have been developed. The main difference in design is
usually the x-height. X-height refers to the size of the lowercase letters
relative to the size of capital letters. A shorter x-height leads to a typeface
which looks smaller.
    Helvetica has a more generous x-height than many other fonts, but as
it’s commonly used as a default typeface we can employ it as our bench-
mark. Compared with Helvetica, Altis has a tall x-height, so to match the
apparent type size of Helvetica you would need to set Altis at a smaller
size. Conversely, Lato has a slightly shorter x-height than Helvetica, so you
might consider setting Lato slightly bigger than the default. Futura has an
even smaller x-height, so you would need to set Futura significantly bigger
to match the perceived type size of Helvetica.
29   Designing paragraphs: text size




     Clockwise (from top-left): Altis, Helvetica, Lato and Futura showing a variety of x-heights.


     When deciding precisely how much to adjust your typefaces there are two
     approaches. First, you could do so by eye and experiment. Set a paragraph
     in Helvetica alongside the same paragraph set in your choice of typeface.
     Using your judgement, tweak the type size of your font one pixel at a time
     until the lowercase letters look about the same size as Helvetica. It’s not an
     exact science but any nudge in the right direction will make a difference
     to your reader.




     Futura must be set at 20 px to match the perceived size of Helvetica at 16 px.


     Calculating type size adjustments
     An experienced typographer will be able to tweak type sizes by eye. It is also
     possible to use the internal font metrics to calculate a size adjustment to
     make one font appear the same size as another. The theory is to adjust the
     font size so that the x-heights are the same. The relative height of lowercase
                                                         Designing paragraphs: text size   30




letters to their uppercase counterparts is commonly referred to as the aspect
value; it is this value we will use in our calculations. Precisely defined, the
aspect value is equal to the x-height of a font divided by the font size.
    A typical aspect value is about 0.5, meaning the x-height is half that of
the type size. The beauty of type is that there’s no such thing as an average
typeface, and it’s the differences we are making adjustments for. If you
have access to font editing software, you can determine the aspect value
from the font metrics used in constructing the fonts. A quicker and easier
way is to use an online aspect value calculator1. Using such tools you’ll
find that the fonts we’ve been looking at have the following aspect values:

Typeface             Aspect Value

Helvetica            0.521

Lato                 0.507

Futura               0.417

Altis                0.542



Given this information, we can calculate a text size for our alternative fonts
that will be make them look about the same size as Helvetica. Here’s how.
Assuming that Helvetica is set at 16 px, then the equivalent size for Lato is:

    16 × 0.521 ÷ 0.507 = 16.5px

Using the same formula with Futura:

    16 × 0.521 ÷ 0.417 = 20.1px

And for Altis:

    16 × 0.521 ÷ 0.542 = 15.2px




1   Online aspect value calculators by Bruno Fassino (http://wbtyp.net/59) and
    Richard Rutter (http://wbtyp.net/58).
31   Designing paragraphs: text size




     Four typefaces with actual size adjusted to match the perceived size of Helvetica.


     The calculations we just went through resulted in font sizes at fractions
     of a pixel. In reality, it’s better not to set your fonts in anything other than
     whole pixels. Nudging one whole pixel at a time will prevent unevenness
     in rendering on lower-resolution screens, and also make layout and type-
     setting calculations easier further down the line.


     Use rems to size your text
     Up to this point we’ve talked about font sizes in terms of pixels. This was
     just for the convenience of explanation. When it comes to CSS you should
     use rem units to size your text. In the chapter ‘The amazing em (and
     friends)’ we learned that rems are relative units which enable you to spec-
     ify sizes in relation to the root <html> element’s font size. If the default
     text size of the browser is 16 px then text sized at 2 rem would always be
     displayed at 32 px, regardless of its context.
                                                                  Designing paragraphs: text size   32




In contrast, text sized in ems is always relative to the parent element and
is thereby prone to inheritance complications. A common example of this
is the shrinking list. Consider the following nested list:

    <ul>
       <li>Item 1
    		<ul>
    			<li>Item 2
    				<ul>
    					<li>Item 3</li>
    				</ul>
    			</li>
    		</ul>
       </li>
    </ul>

If you size the text using something like font-size:0.9em, the list items
will get progressively smaller. If you size the text using rems instead of
ems, font-size:0.9rem, the list items will all stay the same size.




Left: List items sized in ems. Right: List items sized in rems.


So why not just use pixels? In CSS, pixels are absolute units anchored to
a physical measurement. A pixel – short for picture element – used to refer
to a physical pixel on a device, but with the advent of high-resolution
screens the definition has changed. As explained in ‘The amazing em (and
friends)’, CSS3 defines a pixel to be 1/96th of 1 inch (0.26 mm). The idea is
that a CSS pixel is equivalent to the size of a pixel if the screen had a res-
olution of 96 dpi.
    In theory, this means that because pixels refer to a physical length, text
sized in pixels should stay the same regardless of any settings changed by
the reader. In reality, users of most devices can change the text size even
when it is sized in pixels; this wasn’t always the case, however.
33   Designing paragraphs: text size




     Microsoft’s Internet Explorer 6 (and earlier) wouldn’t resize text set in pixels,
     causing a major accessibility problem for any reader needing to adjust the
     text size to better suit their eyesight. The same happened more recently
     with an update to Chrome 52. By the letter of the CSS specification, these
     implementations could not really be said to be wrong – and that logic still
     stands. For the sake of future-proofing, pixels are best avoided for sizing
     text. Once bitten, twice shy.
         Having said that, when web designers think of text size we do tend to
     think in pixels. To think in rems we need to do a simple calculation: for the
     size in rems, divide the required size in pixels by 16 (the typical size of the
     root element). For example, to change your body text to 18 px by setting it
     in rems, you would calculate the following:

         18 ÷ 16 = 1.125

     with the resulting CSS being:

         body { font-size: 1.125rem; }

     Rems provide the same non-inheriting convenience as pixels, but because
     they are a relative unit not tied to any physical dimensions, text sized in
     rems can be resized at will.
        Next we will attach the third leg of the readability stool, and consider
     how line spacing adds stability to the situation.
                                                  Designing paragraphs: line spacing   34




Designing
paragraphs:
line spacing

Line spacing is the final leg of the readability stool and plays an
important role in reading accuracy and comfort. Line spacing is
determined by considering the line length, the typeface, its fit
and size, and the typographic context.


Line height should suit text size and measure
Setting a suitable space between lines of text will ensure your reader’s eye
can rejoin the next line accurately and comfortably. If you set lines too
tightly, your reader’s eyes will struggle to rejoin the text at the correct line.
Reading speed will also be impaired because excessively tight text causes
the eye to take in two lines at the same time, leaving your reader struggling
to focus and tiring quickly.



    Printing demands a humility of mind, for the lack of which
    many of the ﬁne arts are even now ﬂoundering in self-conscious
    and maudlin experiments. There is nothing simple or dull in
    achieving the transparent page. Vulgar ostentation is twice as
    easy as discipline. When you realise that ugly typography never
    eﬀaces itself; you will be able to capture beauty as the wise men
    capture happiness by aiming at something else.


Lines set very tightly.
35   Designing paragraphs: line spacing




     Reading speed also falls for lines too widely spaced. Space lines too loosely
     and you end up with inefficiently used screen estate, and tired eyes. Like
     walking to avoid cracks in the pavement, your reader will need to alter their
     stride unnaturally and concentrate hard just to move forward. Your reader
     will become fatigued as they hop, skip and jump down the page, with their
     eyes still struggling to join the correct line and make sense of the paragraph.



         Printing demands a humility of mind, for the lack of which

         many of the ﬁne arts are even now ﬂoundering in self-conscious

         and maudlin experiments. There is nothing simple or dull in

         achieving the transparent page. Vulgar ostentation is twice as

         easy as discipline. When you realise that ugly typography never

         eﬀaces itself; you will be able to capture beauty as the wise men

         capture happiness by aiming at something else.

     Lines set very loosely.


     Line spacing set just right for comfortable reading strikes a happy balance
     between compactness and separation. Your reader is afforded an easy effi-
     ciency, with lines of text spaced just far enough to ensure accuracy, but
     tight enough to reduce fatigue and scrolling.



         Printing demands a humility of mind, for the lack of which
         many of the ﬁne arts are even now ﬂoundering in self-conscious
         and maudlin experiments. There is nothing simple or dull in
         achieving the transparent page. Vulgar ostentation is twice as
         easy as discipline. When you realise that ugly typography never
         eﬀaces itself; you will be able to capture beauty as the wise men
         capture happiness by aiming at something else.

     Line spacing set sympathetically.
                                                 Designing paragraphs: line spacing   36




Introducing leading
In the predigital age of letterpress, when type was set in rows of metal and
wooden letters, strips of lead were used to separate lines. This is the source
of the term leading (pronounced ‘ledding’) to mean the spacing between
lines of text.




Strips of lead used to separate lines of text.


Leading is described in terms of the distance from one baseline to the next,
as opposed to the size of a strip of lead. If you set lines of 12 pt type, each
separated by 6 pt thick strips of lead, you would say you have 18 pt leading.
In the traditional world of metal type, compositors often express leading
in combination with the type size. For example, 12 pt text with 18 pt leading
would be written using this notation:

      12pt/18pt

In digital typesetting, the convention is to set leading as a multiple or per-
centage. This means 12 pt with 18 pt leading is expressed as:

      12pt/150%

or:

      12pt/1.5
37   Designing paragraphs: line spacing




     Use unitless values to set line-height
     In CSS the spacing between lines is created using the line-height prop-
     erty. This property is surprisingly flexible and allows you to take any of the
     aforementioned approaches to specifying line spacing. The example at the
     beginning of the chapter, where we saw line spacing set sympathetically,
     had 16 px text with 24 px leading. We could achieve that using line-height
     in any of the following ways:

        line-height: 24px;            /* absolute length */

        line-height: 1.5em; /* relative length */

        line-height: 150%;            /* percentage */

        line-height: 1.5;             /* unitless multiplier */

     There is an important difference between how the unitless multiplier and
     values with units work. The distinction lies in how line heights are inher-
     ited by child elements (for example, how a heading would inherit the
     line-height you set on its parent <div>). The inheritance rule can catch
     you out at first as it’s not entirely intuitive. With unitless values the mul-
     tiplier is inherited. For all values with units, including px, em and %, the
     calculated value on the parent is inherited. Consider the following markup
     with three simple <div>s, each containing a heading:

        <div id="unitless">
           <h1>1 Avoid unexpected results by using unitless
        line-height</h1>
        </div>
        <div id="units-pc">
           <h1>2 Avoid unexpected results by using unitless
        line-height</h1>
        </div>
        <div id="units-em">
           <h1>3 Avoid unexpected results by using unitless
        line-height</h1>
        </div>
                                                          Designing paragraphs: line spacing   38




Now apply the following CSS. The headings all have a text size three times
the size of their containers, and we apply line-height to the <div> in three
different ways: without a unit, with a percentage, and in ems.

    div {
       font-size: 15px;
    }
    h1 {
       font-size: 45px;
    }
    #unitless {
       line-height: 1.1;
    }
    #units-pc {
       line-height: 110%;
    }
    #units-em {
       line-height: 1.1em;
    }

This results in different line spacing on the heading due to the inheritance
rules of unitless and unit-specific line heights:


    #unitless

    1 Avoid unexpected results
    by using unitless line-height
    #unit-pc

    2byAvoid
        usingunexpected   results
              unitless line-height
    #unit-em

    3byAvoid
        usingunexpected   results
              unitless line-height
Line-height inheritance can lead to unexpected results.
39   Designing paragraphs: line spacing




     In the example above, the heading inside the <div> with unitless line height
     has a leading of 49.5 px because it has inherited the unitless multiplier
     (45 × 1.1). The headings inside the <div> with line heights set in % and em have
     a leading of 16.5 px because they have inherited the line-height as calcu-
     lated on the parent <div> (15 × 1.1). In most cases, using unitless values
     is the safest way for you to set line-height without getting unexpected
     results.

     Increase line spacing from the browser default
     If you don’t specify line-height anywhere in your style sheet, browsers
     will use the setting associated with the default keyword normal. This is
     defined in CSS as ‘between 1.0 to 1.2’ and is left to browsers to decide. For
     setting type on the web, a line-height of 1.2 is usually too small, as
     comfortable reading on screens tends to benefit from quite generous line
     spacing. A good starting point is to set a line-height of 1.4, but as you’ll
     see later, you may need to adjust that depending on the font.


     Adapt the line spacing to suit the typeface
     Our examples of text set with comfortable line spacing show an evenness
     of colour. This doesn’t mean black (or grey or red or blue) but colour in a
     centuries-old metaphorical sense. When typographers talk about colour
     we are referring to the density of the texture of a body of text – the overall
     blackness of the letterforms en masse against the background. You can
     think of colour as the amount of ink that would be used to print a given
     area on a page. The more ink required, the denser the typographic colour.
        You can’t adjust the typographic colour by changing the type’s actual colour.
     Typographic colour is affected by four factors: the design of the type, the
     spacing between the letters, the spacing between the words, and the spacing
     between the lines. Changing line spacing changes the typographic colour:
     the denser the line spacing, the darker the colour. Colour isn’t a matter of
     accuracy or precise measurement, but something determined by eye. It’s
     about perception. When you typeset paragraphs, aim for an evenness of
     colour as opposed to blotches or stripes. It is the stripes of white between
     the lines that can be most distracting to readers.
                                                                 Designing paragraphs: line spacing      40




Typographic colour: aim for evenness not stripes.


You need to balance your quest for evenness with a desire for a comfortable
amount of blackness to the colour. Too light or too black and the text will
become tiring or hard work to read. Colour is affected significantly by the
weight of the font, but it’s far from being the only factor: colour is just as
much affected by the design of the typeface itself. Fonts have more colour
if their letterforms have heavy strokes or high contrast between thicks and
thins. Wide, open fonts or those with smaller x-heights have less colour.




The design of a typeface affects the colour. Baskerville (left) is much lighter in colour than Adelle.
41   Designing paragraphs: line spacing




     Fonts with more colour – those which are bolder in weight and shorter in
     stature – need their line spacing increased slightly to reduce their heavi-
     ness and lighten the overall colour. The opposite applies to fonts with less
     colour. Tighten the line spacing for fonts which are lighter in weight or
     have a smaller x-height, thereby giving them more presence on the screen
     and darkening their overall appearance.
        Another way to think about it is that the ascenders and descenders of a
     font effectively push the letters apart. A font with a small x-height has pro-
     portionally longer ascenders, pushing the letterforms further apart, so you
     need to reduce line spacing to bring them closer together. Conversely, you
     should nudge apart lines of text which are set in a font with a large x-height.




     Tightening Baskerville’s line spacing to 1.25 compensates for its light colour.



     A shorthand for font settings
     Earlier we learned that typographers often express type size and leading
     together. The same can be done in CSS using the font shorthand property.
     For example, this property:

         font: 15px/1.5 sans-serif;

     is equivalent to:

         font-size: 15px;
         line-height: 1.5;
         font-family: sans-serif;
                                              Designing paragraphs: line spacing   42




You can combine almost all the font-related properties into a single value.
Consider this more comprehensive example:

   font: bold italic 2rem/1.2 "Hoefler Text", "Times", serif;

which is equivalent to:

   font-weight: bold;
   font-style: italic;
   font-size: 2rem;
   line-height: 1.2;
   font-family: "Hoefler Text", "Times", serif;

The font shorthand makes for a handy shortcut, although there are quite
a few gotchas. You must always include the font-size and font-family
portions. If you omit either of these values, browsers will deem your font
property invalid and ignore it. If you don’t include values for font-weight
and font-style the browser will set these to normal and they will not be
inherited. The order of the properties in the font shorthand is also impor-
tant. You must include the font-weight and font-style values first, and
you must include the font-family value last.
43   Alignment, justification and hyphenation




     Alignment,
     justification and
     hyphenation

     Paragraphs can be set in three ways: justified, so that both sides
     have a straight edge; left- or right-aligned, so that they have an
     uneven edge; or they can be centre-aligned.


     Justify well or not at all; if in doubt, align left
     Type has been justified since at least 1439, when Johannes Gutenberg intro-
     duced the printing press and moveable type to Europe in order to diligently
     mimic and reproduce scribes’ handwritten bibles (see opposite).
         Justified text is an aesthetic design choice which creates neat, straight-
     edged text blocks and columns on a page. Justified paragraphs can look
     tidier from a distance but that doesn’t mean they are easier to read. Justified
     text has always precipitated a trade-off between evenness of spacing and
     neatness of layout – setting lines without justifying them is the only way
     to achieve the optimum space between letters and words.
         By default, browsers will align text to the left; or as typographers like
     to say: ragged right. In CSS, text alignment is set with the aptly named
     text-align property, like this:

        p { text-align: left; }

     To justify paragraphs of text, use the value justify:

        p { text-align: justify; }
                                                        Alignment, justification and hyphenation   44




A Gutenberg bible with a four-column spread of justified text.


We could just leave it at that – the CSS could not be simpler. However, the
decision to justify text or not on the web has long been contentious. Ideally
it should be a pure design choice, playing layout against the needs of the
text; unfortunately, our hand is somewhat forced by limitations in the way
browsers justify text.
    Broadly speaking, when justifying text the spacing along a line is                              Type designers would
adjusted so that all lines are the same length. The spacing between words                           rather neither the
                                                                                                    letterforms nor the
can be expanded or reduced accordingly; the spacing between letters can                             letter spacing were
also be adjusted, as can the spacing within letters themselves (for example,                        adjusted at all, as
all letter Os on a line could be compressed slightly to fit an extra word in).                      letter spacing and the
                                                                                                    enclosed shapes of
There are different procedures for adjusting the spacing to achieve justifi-                        characters are intrinsic
cation. CSS3 does not specify a complete justification algorithm: it leaves                         to the art of type design.
browsers to decide the most appropriate way for themselves.
45   Alignment, justification and hyphenation




     Some procedures for justifying text are better than others. The simplest
     method is called the greedy algorithm. This algorithm adjusts only word
     spacing, and is called greedy because it is limited to adding space between
     words. Greedy justification attempts to fit each word on a line until it runs
     out of space and the last word in drops to start the line below. The word
     spacing in the line is then increased so that the text is spread out across
     the whole line. The process repeats until the whole text is set.




     The justification process of the greedy algorithm.


     The greedy algorithm is quick and easy for computers to follow, and takes
     relatively little processing power. It is probably for this reason that this
     method is favoured by web browsers, which tend to prefer speed over com-
     plexity. The greedy algorithm is, however, extremely crude. It will often
     result in unsightly gaps between words, with rivers cascading through par-
     agraphs where spaces between words line up. These disruptions to the
     tempo of the text interrupt and detract from the reading experience. This
     is exaggerated on lower-resolution screens where the adjustments to white
     space may be dealt out in whole pixel intervals, thus widening the word
     spacing even further.
                                                     Alignment, justification and hyphenation   46




Illustration of rivers in greedily justified text.


A more sophisticated justification algorithm is the Knuth–Plass method,
developed for the TeX typesetting system, and adapted by software includ-
ing Adobe InDesign and Illustrator. Knuth–Plass differs from the greedy
method in two important ways. First, as well as adding space between
words, it will reduce space, resulting in fewer large gaps between words.
Second, it assesses the effect of justification on the paragraph as a whole
and will adjust the line breaks to find the set of breakpoints that will give
the most pleasing result for the entire paragraph. The algorithm may com-
promise the spacing of one line to minimise situations where a very loose
line is immediately followed by a very tightly spaced line, thus benefiting
the paragraph as a whole.
   Knuth–Plass is a far more complex algorithm than the greedy method
and thus takes more processing power. Additionally the memory require-
ments increase quadratically with the paragraph length, so browser makers
are wary of implementing Knuth–Plass despite the obvious benefits to the
reader. That said, there should still be scope to use a more sophisticated
version of the line-by-line greedy method in order to reduce, as well as
increase, spacing between words and letters.
                    47       Alignment, justification and hyphenation




                                                                        Step 1
                                                    In the embellishment or decoration of a message,




                                 Step 2a                                                                     Step 2b
             In the embellishment or decoration of a                                     In the embellishment or decoration of a message,
             message, there lies the opportunity for the little added                    there lies the opportunity for the little added touch




                   Step 3a                                                                     Step 3c
In the embellishment or decoration of a                                     In the embellishment or decoration of a message,
message, there lies the opportunity for the little                          there lies the opportunity for the little added
added touch that goes far beyond the bare essentials                        touch that goes far beyond the bare essentials of taste




                                Step 3b                                                                      Step 3d
             In the embellishment or decoration of a                                     In the embellishment or decoration of a message,
             message, there lies the opportunity for the little added                    there lies the opportunity for the little added touch
             touch that goes far beyond the bare essentials of taste                     that goes far beyond the bare essentials of taste and



                             The Knuth–Plass method:
                             The first line is inserted word by word until it no longer fits (1). The algorithm now has a choice:
                             it could move the word to the next line (2a); or decrease the word spacing and fit the word on
                             the first line (2b). This process continues with each new line producing more alternatives (3a–d).
                             The algorithm eventually chooses the best outcome for the paragraph.




                             Don’t justify the final line of a paragraph
                             The final line of a justified paragraph should always be aligned left. If not,
                             you will almost always end up with horrendous gaps between the words.
                             There may be occasions when you want to break this rule, such as setting
                             a display paragraph in a perfect rectangle. By default, CSS will left-justify
                             the final line of an element. CSS3 provides text-align-last, enabling you
                             to fully justify the final line if you need to:

                                  p { text-align-last: justify; }

                             Use knowingly and sparingly, and not for paragraphs within a block of
                             continuous text.
                                                     Alignment, justification and hyphenation   48




Don’t justify without hyphenating
Never set justified text without using hyphenation. You can, however,
hyphenate without justifying text. Using hyphenation with left-aligned,
right-aligned and centred text can improve readability and overall appear-
ance by greatly reducing the raggedness of text.
   Hyphenation has been around as long as justification. Look closer at
Gutenberg’s 600-year-old bible designs and you will see hyphenation is
an intrinsic part of the justification process, just as it was for the scribes
he was emulating.




Gutenberg’s justified text was heavily hyphenated.


Hyphens in text read from a screen can sometimes seem incongruous,                               Agglutinative languages
especially if the general design is dissimilar to books, newspapers or other                     will always need
                                                                                                 hyphenating. Consider
print work where hyphens are commonplace. If hyphens jar with you as a                           arbeidsongeschiktheids-
designer, or – more importantly – if you find evidence that they jar with                        verzekering (which
your readers, simply avoid justifying text and set your paragraphs ragged                        means disability
                                                                                                 insurance in Dutch).
right, thereby reducing the need to hyphenate. Remember, though, that to
justify text without hyphenating is to wilfully harm the reading experience.

Manual hyphenation
In HTML, there are two types of hyphen: the ordinary hyphen and the
soft hyphen (also known as a discretionary hyphen). Ordinary hyphens are
always displayed by browsers, so you use them mostly to indicate compos-
ite words such as fly-by-wire. You can also use them for purposes of clarity;
for example, the phrase twenty four hour shifts is ambiguous. Use a hyphen
to clarify whether you mean twenty four-hour shifts or twenty-four hour shifts.
    The soft hyphen enables you to tell the browser where a word could be
broken across two lines. It will not be read out by screen reading software
and will only be displayed when a word is actually being broken. Soft
hyphens are therefore what you would use to hyphenate manually.
                          49   Alignment, justification and hyphenation




                               In HTML the soft hyphen’s named character entity reference is &shy; and
                               its Unicode number is U+00AD. Given that automatic hyphenation is now
                               possible in CSS (as we shall see), the main use for soft hyphens is for pro-
                               viding hyphenation hints within unusual or fictional words. For example
                               you could set hyphenation break points for the made-up word contrafibu-
                               larity as follows:

                                   contra&shy;fibu&shy;lar&shy;ity

                               The various JavaScript-based hyphenation routines available online work
                               by inserting soft hyphens into your text.

                               Word breaks without hyphens
                               It’s worth noting that HTML provides an element that enables you to indi-
                               cate where a word could be broken across lines, even when line-breaking
                               rules would not normally apply at that point in the word. This element is
                               <wbr> or word break opportunity. By definition, it does not introduce a hyphen
                               at the line break point, but does still allow the word to render across mul-
                               tiple lines. It is particularly useful for splitting long URLs which would not
                               normally break; for example:

                                   <p>http://this<wbr>.is<wbr>.a<wbr>.really<wbr>.long<wbr>.
                                   example<wbr>.com/With<wbr>/deeper<wbr>/level<wbr>/
                                   pages<wbr>/deeper<wbr>/level<wbr>/pages<wbr>/deeper<wbr>/
                                   level<<wbr>/pages<wbr>/deeper<wbr>/level<wbr>/pages<wbr>/
                                   deeper<wbr>/level<wbr>/pages</p>

                               Which could render as:

                                   http://this.is.a.really.long.example.com/With/deeper/level/pages/deeper/
                                   level/pages/deeper/level/pages/deeper/level/pages/deeper/level/pages



                               Automatic hyphenation
Hyphenation is a complex       There are two steps required to turn on automatic hyphens. The first is to
     subject. Hyphenation       set the language of the text. This will tell the browser which hyphenation dic-
  points are mainly based
       on syllables using a     tionary to use. Each language has different rules – even for the same words
combination of etymology       – and correct automatic hyphenation requires a hyphenation dictionary
and phonology, but house
 styles also have differing    appropriate to the language of the text. In English we hyphenate cab·ri·o·let,
  rules on dividing words.      but in French the hyphenation is ca·brio·let. If the browser does not know
                                               Alignment, justification and hyphenation   50




the language of the text, the CSS guidelines say it is not required to hyphen-
ate automatically – even if you turn on hyphenation in a style sheet.
    The language of a webpage should ideally be sent as an HTTP header by
the web server (speak to your friendly sysadmin about this). You can also
set it using the HTML lang attribute:

    <html lang="en">

Setting the language is best practice for all web pages regardless of whether
you are hyphenating or not. Knowing the language of the text will help
automatic translating tools, screen readers and other assistive software.
    The lang="en" attribute uses an ISO language tag 1 to tell the browser
that the text is in English. In this case the browser will choose its default
English hyphenation dictionary, which will often mean hyphenating for
American English. This will usually be fine, but there are some differ-
ences in spelling and pronunciation between American and British Eng-
lish (Canadian, Australian, and others also have their differences). For
example, in Britain, advertisement is pronounced ad·VERT·is·ment, whereas
in America it is typically pronounced ad·ver·TIZE·ment. The differently
stressed syllables change where the ideal word break should be. Similarly,
North American English has the word aluminum. Outside North America,
the word is aluminium, which may not be present in an American English
hyphenation dictionary, and thus might not be hyphenated as or when
required. The solution is to add a region to the language:

    <html lang="en-GB">

Indicate the language even for single foreign words or brief quotations.
That way hyphenation should be applied appropriately (and the words
interpreted correctly by other language-sensitive tools). Do this by adding
lang attributes to containing elements in your markup:

    <p>You'd say that in Spanish as <span lang="es">Cuatro
    cervezas, por favor</span>.</p>

Now you’ve set your language, you are ready to turn on automatic hyphen-
ation in CSS. This couldn’t be much easier:

    hyphens: auto


1   W3C advice on language tags in HTML (http://wbtyp.net/82).
51   Alignment, justification and hyphenation




     The hyphens property has two other values. hyphens:manual means only
     hyphenate a word across a line break at manually inserted normal or
     soft hyphens. The third value hyphens:none means that words must not
     be broken across lines even if they contain normal or soft hyphens. Put
     more simply, hyphens:manual turns off automatic hyphenation, whereas
     hyphens:none turns off all hyphenation.
         There are some widely accepted rules around which words should or
     shouldn’t be hyphenated. Don’t hyphenate words of one syllable, even
     though several are quite long: strengths, wrought, grasped, screeched, stretched.
     As a general rule don’t hyphenate proper nouns (names of people, places
     and organisations) or fully capitalised abbreviations. That said, you can
     get away with hyphenating frequently occurring proper nouns after their
     first appearance, or proper nouns which appear as frequently as common
     nouns. Consider the sentence:

        Irina Bokova is the Director-General of UNESCO.


     You can mark this up as follows:

        <p><span class="pn">Irina Bokova</span> is the <span class="pn">
        Director-General</span> of <abbr>UNESCO</abbr>.</p>

     and apply the following CSS rule:

        .pn, abbr { hyphens: manual; }

     This will prevent ‘Irina’, ‘Bokova’ and ‘UNESCO’ from being hyphenated.
     It will allow ‘Director-General’ to be broken at the hyphen, but will not
     hyphenate the individual words.


     Hyphenate judiciously and with care
     The Knuth–Plass justification algorithm described earlier has an advanced
     hyphenation routine built in. This takes into account – and limits – the
     amount of hyphenation over an entire paragraph.
        Hyphenation routines used in browsers are generally not as sophisti-
     cated as Knuth–Plass, but the CSS Text Module Level 4 has introduced the
     same kind of hyphenation controls provided in advanced layout software.
     These enable you to tweak hyphenation routines to your satisfaction.
                                                     Alignment, justification and hyphenation     52




Limit the number of consecutive hyphenated lines
For aesthetic reasons, limit the number of lines in a row that are hyphenated.
Consecutively hyphenated lines, particularly three or more, are pejoratively
called a ladder. The general rule of thumb for English is that two consecu-
tive lines is the ideal maximum (in contrast, readers of German may well
be faced with many ladders). By default, CSS sets no limit to the number of
consecutive hyphens, but you can use the hyphenate-limit-lines prop-
erty to specify a maximum:

    hyphenate-limit-lines: 2




hyphenate-limit-lines applied to prevent a ladder.


You can remove the limit using the no-limit value:

    hyphenate-limit-lines: no-limit

Limit the word length and the number of characters
before and after a hyphen
If you hyphenate short words they can be harder to read. Likewise, you
don’t want too few characters left on a line before the hyphen, or pushed
to the next line after the hyphen. A common rule of thumb is to only allow
words at least six-letters long to be hyphenated, leaving at least three char-
acters before the word break, and taking a minimum of two to the next line2.

2   The Oxford Style Manual recommends that three is the minimum number of letters
    after a hyphen at a line break, though exceptions can be made in very short measures
    for words ending -ad, -al, -an, -en, -fy, -ic and -or. Before the break, two is permissible
    in very short measures, depending on the syllabic nature of the word. Other style
    manuals have their own guidance.
53   Alignment, justification and hyphenation




     You can set these limits with the hyphenate-limit-chars property. It
     takes three space-separated values. The first is the minimum character
     limit for a word to be hyphenated; the second is the minimum number
     of characters before the hyphenation break; and the last is the minimum
     characters after the hyphenation break. To set the aforementioned rule
     of thumb, with a six-character word limit, three characters before the
     hyphenation break and two after, use:

         hyphenate-limit-chars: 6 3 2




     hyphenate-limit-chars in action.


     If you omit the last value, it is set to be the same as the second, so:

         hyphenate-limit-chars: 6 3

     is the same as:

         hyphenate-limit-chars: 6 3 3

     If you only include one value, the last two are set automatically by the
     browser, so:

         hyphenate-limit-chars: 6

     is the same as:

         hyphenate-limit-chars: 6 auto auto

     The default value for hyphenate-limit-chars is auto for all three settings.
     This means that the browser should pick the best settings based on the
     current language and layout. The CSS Text Module Level 4 suggests that
     browsers use 5 2 2 as their starting point, but browsers are free to vary
     that as their hyphenation algorithms see fit.
                                          Alignment, justification and hyphenation   54




Legacy support for hyphenation limits
Hyphenation character limits were originally specified in CSS3 using two
separate properties: hyphenate-limit-before and hyphenate-limit-after.
In April 2011 these were merged into the hyphenate-limit-chars prop-
erty described above. However, at the time of writing, Safari 10 only sup-
ports hyphenation character limits using the legacy properties. For a more
backwards-compatible set of instructions, you could support hyphenation
character limits in Safari 10 using:

   p {
      -webkit-hyphenate-limit-before: 3;
      -webkit-hyphenate-limit-after: 2;
      hyphenate-limit-chars: 6 3 2;
   }



Reduce hyphenation by setting a hyphenation zone
By default, hyphenation will occur as often as the browser can split a word
across two lines (within the hyphenate-limit-chars and hyphenate-
limit-lines values you set). This means an entire paragraph could be set
with three hyphenated lines, followed by an unbroken word, followed by
three hyphenated lines, followed by an unbroken word, followed by three
hyphenated lines, and so on. The hyphenate-limit-lines: 3 rule hasn’t
been broken, but the paragraph will still look a mess. Fortunately you can
influence this by setting a hyphenation zone.
    Consider a left-aligned paragraph. The right edge is ragged, which
hyphenation can reduce. By default you will get the maximum amount
of hyphenation and thus the maximum reduction to the rag. If you are
prepared to tolerate a little more unevenness to the edge of the paragraph,
you can reduce the amount of hyphenation. In effect you are allowing
there to be a bit more space between the last word in the line and the edge
of the paragraph.
    By setting the maximum amount of space you’ll allow between the last
word of a line and the edge of the paragraph, you are setting the hyphena-
tion zone. To do this you use the hyphenation-limit-zone property, which
takes a percentage value (in terms of the width of the text box) or a length;
for example:

   hyphenate-limit-zone: 2em
55   Alignment, justification and hyphenation




     The default value for hyphenate-limit-zone is zero; that is, minimum rag,
     maximum hyphenation.




     Left: Regular hyphenation with no (zero) hyphenation zone. Right: Hyphenation with 2 em
     hyphenation zone. Arrows indicate lines where hyphenation is allowed.


     In the context of the flexible paragraphs we discussed in earlier chapters,
     it makes most sense to set your hyphenation zone as a percentage. Based
     on typical defaults in page layout software, 8% is a good start:

         hyphenate-limit-zone: 8%

     In terms of absolute dimensions, using a percentage means you would get
     a smaller hyphenation zone on smaller screens, leading to more hyphen-
     ation and less rag. Conversely on wider screens you would get a broader
     hyphenation zone, hence less hyphenation and more rag, which a wider
     measure would be better able to accommodate.
                                            Alignment, justification and hyphenation   56




You can set a hyphenation zone regardless of whether you are aligning or
justifying. In both circumstances, you reduce the number of hyphens by
making the hyphenation zone wider; or reduce the raggedness of the text
by making the hyphenation zone narrower.

Avoid leaving the stub of a hyphenated word as the last
line of a paragraph
Unless you tell it otherwise, a browser will happily hyphenate the very last
word of a paragraph such that the end of the broken word sits alone on the
final line, a lonely orphan of an orphan. It is preferable to have a large gap
at the end of the penultimate line than having half a word on the final line.
You can achieve this by activating the hyphenate-limit-last property
with a value of always.

   hyphenate-limit-last: always

It’s worth noting that while you should ensure only whole words form the
final line of a paragraph, it’s better still to have at least two words on the
final line. Unfortunately, there is no way in CSS to automate that.


Don’t centre long passages of text
Centred headings are fine, as are short introductory paragraphs. Stylisti-
cally, centred text can provide a classical feel: nice to look at, affording har-
mony, elegance and even authority. But long passages of centred text are
tiring and more difficult to read, so avoid centring your main body of text.
57   Responsive paragraphs




     Responsive
     paragraphs

     With more and more web-enabled gadgets entering the hands of
     readers every day, web designers must aspire to make their des-
     igns flexible and adaptable to screens and devices of all shapes and
     sizes. This is what we call responsive design. At its heart, responsive
     design is not about finding the perfect design, but finding the
     best compromise.


     Adapt your design to the reading context
     Your reader could be using a small phone, a large phone, an old phone, a
     tablet, a square screen, a wide screen, a mini-laptop, a massive laptop, a
     modest desktop, a huge monitor, a television, a game console, an aircraft
     seat, or a cinematic projector. Your design will need to work regardless.
         For your design to respond and adapt to the dimensions and capabili-
     ties of your reader’s device, you need to know something about that device
     and have a mechanism by which you can tweak your design accordingly.
     It is precisely for this reason that media queries were developed in CSS3.

     Introducing media queries
     A media query enables you to not only target certain types of rendering
     (primarily either screen or print), but also to inspect the physical char-
     acteristics of a device. Media queries are rules used by browsers to deter-
     mine whether a style sheet should be used or not. By way of example we
     can incorporate a media query into a linked style sheet’s media attribute
     like this:

        <link rel="stylesheet" media="screen and (min-width: 960px)"
        href="wide.css" />
                                                           Responsive paragraphs   58




The media query contains two components: a media type of screen, and
an expression enclosed within parentheses. The media query expression
contains a media feature (min-width) followed by the target value (960px).
In plain English, the media query is asking the device if it is a screen and,
if so, whether its horizontal resolution is at least 960 px. If it is, then the
browser will load wide.css; otherwise the link is ignored altogether, the
style sheet won’t be loaded and the styles within it won’t be applied.
    Many devices with small screens will initially try to render a web page
by shrinking it down. In effect, they pretend to have bigger screens than
they actually do, and then squeeze a large page into their small screen.
This works adequately for web pages which are not responsive, but if you
are using media queries you will need to tell the device that it should tell
the truth about its screen size and initially not scale the page. To make
these two requests of a device, add the following <meta> tag to the <head>
of your page:

   <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,
   initial-scale=1.0">

Media queries can also be used to selectively apply rules within a style sheet.
To do this, use @media rules in your style sheet as follows:

   p { font-size: 1rem; }

   @media screen and (min-width: 60em) {
      p { font-size: 1.2rem; }
   }

In this example, paragraphs are sized at 1 rem unless the device’s screen
is 60 em or wider, in which case the media query overrides the preceding
rule and paragraphs are sized at 1.2 rem. When you use a minimum width
like this, it is usually called a breakpoint. Think of it as the point at which
the design would break unless you applied additional styles.

Use ems rather than pixels to determine the screen width
Use ems to ensure your layout adaptations are based on typographic rea-
soning rather than being tied to specific devices. What the preceding media
query is not saying is: on an Apple tablet do this, on a Samsung smartphone
do that, on an Amazon e-reader do the other. Importantly, using ems takes
into account situations when your reader adjusts the default font size of
59   Responsive paragraphs




     their device. Defining screen sizes in ems means your rules are set not
     solely by the size of a screen, but also based on the effect a screen has on
     the type.


     Adjust type size according to reading distance
     The ideal size of your text doesn’t just depend on your reader’s default pref-
     erence, but also on reading distance: the farther away the text, the smaller
     it becomes perceptually. To compensate for longer reading distances, you
     therefore need to make the text size bigger.




     ‘These are small, but the ones out there are far away.’ © Hat Trick Productions Ltd with permission.


      Computers (that is, desktop screens and laptops) are generally read from
      farther away than books, newspapers and other printed matter. Typically,
     we hold books with bent arms such that the text is about 35 cm from our
      eyes. In contrast, a laptop or tablet screen – whether on a table or a knee
     – might well be 45 cm away, and a desktop is likely to be even farther, up
      to 60 cm. As each device is read from a different distance, the perceived
      text size differs, getting smaller the farther away the screen. You need to
      correct for this.
                                                                           Responsive paragraphs   60




Calculate text sizes for different devices
A printed book, typically held 35 cm away from the eyes and with type set
at 10 pt, gives a perceived text size of 30 arcminutes. An arcminute is a meas-
ure of the size of a perceived object, used by ergonomists. It is actually an
angle (one sixtieth of a degree), which means text size expressed in arc-
minutes can take into account both type size and distance from the eye.




                                                                                   Aa

Text size expressed in arcminutes reveals the angle formed by the height of the text and the
distance from the eye. Image courtesy SizeCalc.com


Studies show that when reading we hold smartphones slightly nearer than
we do books, often at 30 cm1 or closer. To achieve a perceived text size of
30 arcmins – the same comfortable size as a book – we can calculate2 that
text on a phone screen should be about 2.6 mm tall. On a smartphone this
approximates to text set at 16 px, which nicely justifies the assertion we
made in ‘Designing paragraphs: text size’ that you should use the default
text size for continuous reading.
    On that same basis, let’s consider screens viewed from 45 cm away. To
achieve 30 arcmins at that distance, you would need text to be about 3.9 mm
tall, which is equivalent to 18–19 px on a modern laptop or tablet screen. For
desktop screens positioned 60 cm away from your reader, the text would
need to be 5.2 mm tall, which is equivalent to 22 px on a large display.




1   ‘Font Size and Viewing Distance of Handheld Smart Phones’ (http://wbtyp.net/8)
    by Yuliya Bababekova, Mark Rosenfield, Jennifer E. Hue, Rae R Huang in Optometry &
    Vision Science Vol 88, Issue 7, (2011).
2   Using Size Calc (http://wbtyp.net/74).
     61   Responsive paragraphs




Reader

                                                                                    5.2 mm
                                           2.6 mm




                               30 cm


                                                    60 cm


          Showing that text must become larger if the viewing distance increases.


          All this implies a situation where we’d ideally want to increase the text size
          depending on how far away the screen is from our reader – yet we have
          no way of determining precisely how far away their screen actually is3. We
          must, therefore, turn to some approximations. First of all, we start with
          our default text size:

              p { font-size: 1rem; }

          We established that this is fine for smartphones, but for laptops and tablets
          on knees or desks we need to bump the text size up to 18 px.

              18px in rems = 18 ÷ 16 = 1.125rem

          Typical laptop and tablet widths start from 960 px, which is equivalent to
          60 ems (960 ÷ 16). So we can compile our first media query:

              @media screen and (min-width: 60em) {
                 p { font-size: 1.125rem; }
              }




          3   Apart from some clever hacks such as Marko Dugonjić’s face detection experiment
              (http://wbtyp.net/72).
                                                                    Responsive paragraphs   62




That rule will match any screen at least 60 em wide. To target large desk-
top screens we need an additional media query to increase the text size to
22 px. If we posit that desktop screens start at 1,920 px wide, equivalent to
120 ems (1,920 ÷ 16), we can add this second media query:

    @media screen and (min-width: 120em) {
       p { font-size: 1.1375rem; }
    }

Of course, we’ve made many assumptions along the way here, not least of
which is guessing how far away readers are from their screens. We’ve also
had to use broad approximations to correlate screen size with device type
and reading distance. This is the limited set of tools we web typographers
are given, so we must make the most of it. We can at least rest easy in the
knowledge that if our assumptions are wrong, our readers can adjust the
text size to their satisfaction, which is more than you can say for our cous-
ins designing for the printed word.

Keep your big text under control
Text that’s too big also poses a problem. When type gets huge, your reader’s
eyes try to follow their usual pattern. But a font size that’s too large takes
up more horizontal space, and it interferes with your reader’s horizontal
flow of saccades and fixations (see ‘How we read’). Overly large text forces
the reader to slow down and adjust how far they skip ahead as they read.
Reading horizontally becomes cumbersome, and your reader will start to
skip vertically down the left edge of the text, missing out on much of the
content carefully crafted by the writer.
   Text which ends up really big will have your reader physically turning
their head as they scan the screen. Either that or they end up scooting their
chair backwards into whatever (or whoever) is behind them.   

Beware of the tablet problem
When it comes to reading, tablets are extremely versatile devices. Your read-
ers can hold them in a landscape or portrait orientation, and they can be
used in numerous contexts and environments. According to designer Craig
Mod4, these typically break down into three reading distances: bed, knee
and breakfast:



4   ‘A Simpler Page’ (http://wbtyp.net/24) by Craig Mod in A List Apart Issue 321 (2011).
                     63   Responsive paragraphs




                          • Bed (close to face): your reader is lying on their front with their tablet
                            propped up on a pillow.
                          • Knee (medium distance from face): your reader is sitting on their sofa,
                            or perhaps a train or bus, with a tablet on their knee.
                          • Breakfast (far from face): Their tablet is propped up on a breakfast table
                            behind their tea and toast (or coffee and croissant), reading hands-free.

                          There’s no way to detect these different reading distances and dispositions,
                          so there’s nothing you can do about it, other than being aware of the pos-
                          sibilities, and testing with them.


                          Test your design in a responsive prototype
                          Typography for the web is really hard to design anywhere other than a
                          browser. By testing and iterating your design in a browser-based prototype,
                          you can solve the fundamentals before (or even instead of) jumping to
                          other design tools, such as Photoshop, Illustrator or Sketch.
 Improvise, calculate,        Your typography prototype should be a single web page that preferably
     test, iterate and    consists of some real content. Gradually apply styles to the text to build up
improvise some more.
                          the design, just as we have done – and will continue to do – through the
                          chapters in this book. As you add more styles, test them in different con-
                          texts: different devices, different screens, different reading distances, and
                          so on, tweaking the design as you go. Use your typography prototype as
                          the foundation for the rest of your design by starting with the fundamen-
                          tal ingredients – the content and the typography – and adding hierarchy,
                          layout, colour and flourishes as you go.

                          Stepping back and squinting are no substitute for reading
                          A prototype gives you the perfect opportunity to properly test your design.
                          Many designers test their work by positioning themselves away from the
                          monitor to consider their work from afar, like an oil painter stepping back
                          from a canvas to survey the bigger picture. Others too will squint their
                          eyes, blurring their vision to get a sense of the overall colour, hierarchy
                          and organisation of the page. There’s no harm in this, and both techniques
                          can help you quickly assess how well your design holds together. However,
                          they are of no use whatsoever when it comes to determining the readability
                          of your text. There’s only one way to test that, and that’s to actually read
                          what you’re setting.
                             This where real content comes into its own. If real content is not readily
                          available from your client, customer or boss, do your best to demand, beg
                                                        Responsive paragraphs   64




or borrow it, emphasising its importance to your task. Ask for early drafts,
sample content from other sources, or, failing that, simply find some text
with which you are unfamiliar (a random news story, for example). Change
your text each time you test a new iteration of your design – you’ll never
be able to judge readability with a passage of text you know back to front.
2 Typographic
  Detail




 • Symbols, signs and accents
 • Ligatures and abbreviations
 • Hierarchy and scale
 • Meaning and semantics
 • Numerals and tables
 • Tracking and kerning
 • Headlines and impact
 • Vertical rhythm
 • Arrangement and composition
   ¶ Typography is all about
 the little details adding up to a
reading experience greater than
       the sum of its parts.
67   Symbols, signs and accents




     Symbols, signs
     and accents

     Typography is about sweating the tiniest details. In isolation
     these are subtle, almost invisible and seemingly trivial, but taken
     as a whole the impression they give is greater than the sum of
     their parts. Give full typographic attention even to incidental
     details, and use the right character for the job.


     There is more than one space
     The space between characters which you insert using your space bar is a
     glyph unto itself: Unicode encodes it at U+0020. A space usually separates
     words by about 0.25 em, but there is no standard size. Type designers will
     specify the width of a space in a given font just as they would design any
     other glyph.

     Non-breaking spaces
     A non-breaking space (also known as a hard space) keeps the two words it
     separates together on the same line. You can insert a non-breaking space
     into HTML using the entity &nbsp;. Use a non-breaking space in phrases
     such as ‘Page 2’ (Page&nbsp;2) to prevent the 2 dropping to a subsequent
     line should the text wrap. The same applies to initials in names such as
     D. H. Lawrence, where you will want to keep the initials alongside the
     surname (note also there are little to no spaces between the initials them-
     selves). Likewise, dates such as 14 March should be kept together with a
     non-breaking space.

     Hairs and thins
     Several other spaces exist. These are generally used when a regular space
     is too big but you still need to separate characters. A thin space is usually
     1/6 em wide and you can insert them in HTML using the entity &thinsp;.
                                                         Symbols, signs and accents   68




One particular use for thin spaces is separating nested quotation marks;
for example: Looking up, he said, ‘She mouthed “I love you” ’ and then returned to
his book has the final quotation marks separated by a thin space.
    Hair spaces – as the name implies – are very narrow, usually 1/24 em
wide. They are used when you simply want to prevent adjacent characters
touching, rather than to provide any significant separation. You can insert
a hair space in HTML with &#8202; (and with &hairsp; since HTML5).
    For the aforementioned D. H. Lawrence, you can separate the initials
using a thin space, although if you do so you might run the risk of the
initials wrapping across lines. To prevent that, you should use a narrow
no-break space, which is &#8239; in HTML. Also use narrow no-break spaces
between numbers and their units.

   D.&#8239;H.&nbsp;Lawrence was a writer.
   A hair space is 1/24&#8239;em wide.


If a word has an accent, use it
As web typographers, we often have very little control or even knowledge
of the actual words, letters and symbols we are typesetting. Content is
sucked out of a database and funnelled through our design filter onto the
screens of our readers. Wherever possible we should still care, worry and
take ownership of the finer details of that content. In particular, we should
be aware of the scourge of the keyboard.
    Computer keyboards betray their ancestry as teleprinters: electro-
mechanical typewriters developed as communication tools. In the 1960s,
teleprinters began to use a system known as ASCII (American Standard
Code for Information Interchange), which was developed from the binary
telegraphic codes of the time. ASCII includes 95 printable characters cov-
ering 26 upper- and lowercase letters, digits 0 – 9, and various punctuation
marks including a space. These 95 characters are still what make up a
modern computer keyboard in English-speaking nations. Each of the 26
letters of the alphabet are accessed by a single keypress with or without
Shift held down. Any non-ASCII character is far more difficult to locate
and type, which might not be so bad were it not for the fact that ASCII is
not sufficient for English, let alone other languages.
    Consider these common words: aïoli, crème fraîche, doppelgänger, El
Niño, façade, fiancée, flambé, jalapeño, maître d’, Māori, pâté. Too often we
see words like these without their requisite accents and diacritics. While
accents in English usually disappear once a foreign word has become
69   Symbols, signs and accents




     thoroughly anglicised, it can lead to confusion. For example, we may
     wonder whether the balding man who likes chutney on his pate is refer-
     ring to a lunchtime habit or a novel cure for his receding hairline. Which
     accents are used can be a matter of house style, but it is nonetheless our job
     to care about diacritics and other fine details should they leave a writer’s
     keyboard and sneak past an editor.

     Pay particular attention to accented names
     Some names in common use include José, Chloë, Ciarán, Sîan, Beyoncé
     and Brontë. People deserve to have their names spelled correctly – it’s a
     common courtesy, and a missing accent amounts to an incorrect spelling.
     Unfortunately, keyboard-induced typographic ethnocentricity doesn’t leave
     much hope for our friends Dugonjić and Mrdjenovič.
         Accented names are commonplace, even in countries where English is
     the first language. For example, here is a fictional football formation con-
     sisting of players from the English Premier League whose names contain
     all the accents and diacritics that have featured over the past twenty years:




     Footballers featuring all the different accents since the formation of the English Premier League.
                                                        Symbols, signs and accents   70




 Since the Premier League began two decades ago, there have been over
 200 players with an accent in their surname. Any publication covering the
 English Premier League should ensure its writers know and include the
 correct accents in every player’s name. By implication, the fonts chosen
 to display the text should also include these accented characters – see
‘Practical and pragmatic considerations’ for more detail.


Use the appropriate punctuation marks
Orthotypography is the aspect of typography that defines the meaning and
accepted usage of typographic signs and symbols, in particular punctua-
tion. Treat punctuation as notation, not expression. In other words, don’t
draw attention to the symbols; they are there to provide additional mean-
ing to the text, not to decorate it. (Unless you are setting text for atten-
tion-grabbing display purposes, in which case all such guidelines can be
wilfully ignored.)

Don’t use a hyphen instead of a dash
A hyphen (-) is directly accessible with one stroke of your keyboard. In
typography it has four uses: joining words to indicate they have a com-
bined meaning, such as pick-me-up, government-mandated, non-negotiable,
Berners-Lee; indicating missing words shared by a series of compounds,
as in the short- and long-term effects; indicating stuttering speech, like ‘p-p-
please’; and splitting words when breaking them across lines. For any other
use you require a different symbol, usually a dash.
    There are two common kinds of dash: the en dash and the em dash. Both
dashes are longer than a hyphen, can sometimes be slightly thicker, and
occasionally will sit lower. The em dash (—) is 1 em long and the en dash
(–) is 1 en long, precisely half the length of an em dash.

En dashes
You can insert an en dash into HTML with the &ndash; entity. Use en dashes
in phrases with numerical ranges such as: 4 – 5 minutes; 28 March – 3 April;
copyright 2005 – 2016; and 87 – 135 Brompton Road. There’s usually no need
to insert a space either side of the dash in these situations, although you
could slip in a hair space if the dash appears to be touching the characters
either side.
    In British English, spaced en dashes – rather than em dashes – are
generally used to set off phrases and parenthetical statements. In other
words, if you’d rather not use parentheses (like this) then you could use
71   Symbols, signs and accents




     dashes – like this – instead. Using dashes tends to add emphasis to the
     text, whereas parentheses remove it, marking something tangential to the
     main point. Separate en dashes from phrases with a full space. When you
     would choose dashes over parentheses is entirely down to writing style
     and context.

     Em dashes
     In American English, em dashes — rather than en dashes — are generally
     used to set off phrases. Separate em dashes from phrases with hair spaces.
     You can insert an em dash into HTML using &mdash;.

     Normal space with em dash                 this and that — that and this

     Thin space with em dash                   this and that — that and this

     Hair space with em dash                   this and that — that and this

     No space with em dash                     this and this—that and this

     Comparison of spaces around an em dash.


     Other uses of em dashes might be mandated by house style. You might
     choose to use an em dash followed by a full space to indicate attribution
     after a quote:

         One more attribute the modern typographer must have: the capacity for taking
         great pains with seemingly unimportant detail. To him, one typographical
         point must be as important as one inch, and he must harden his heart against
         the accusation of being too fussy.
                                                              — Hans P. Schmoller


     You can also use em dashes to indicate lines in dialogue and remove the
     need for quotation marks:

        — Aren’t you a little short for a Stormtrooper?
        — I’m Luke Skywalker. I’m here to rescue you!

      The required presence of an em dash is often indicated by a double hyphen
     -- a relic from manual typewriters when only hyphens were available.
      Replace double hyphens with the appropriate dash.
                                                     Symbols, signs and accents   72




In running text use a proper minus
Hyphens are very commonly used to mean minus. For programmers writ-
ing code, a hyphen has a special encoding which does indeed imply minus.
However, for anyone needing a minus symbol in running text, a hyphen is
the wrong character to use. Use a proper minus glyph; for example: 10− 7 = 3
is simple subtraction. The main advantage is that a proper minus symbol
is designed to go between digits and will therefore sit at the appropriate
height in the line. Minus symbols are also usually identical in length and
weight to one of the strokes in an equals sign and thus look more consist-
ent in an equation; or, rather, a hyphen can look wrong when placed in
proximity to an equals: 10 - 7 = 3. A hyphen is often shorter and sits higher
in the line. In HTML you can use the &minus; entity.

Use a division symbol rather than a slash
Like neutral quotation marks, use of a / slash symbol (otherwise known
as a solidus or virgule) to denote divided by is another survivor from the
typewriter keyboard. If you are not quoting code then use the proper divi-
sion sign, an obelus ÷. It is neater, more likely to be understood by people
not familiar with programming conventions, and less likely to be confused
with alternative meanings such as ‘or’ should the context not be clear. A
division symbol can be inserted with the &divide; entity.

Use proper and appropriate quotation marks
and apostrophes
Other relics of typewriters are the neutral quotation marks (' ") inherited
from a time when only one key was available to indicate a quote. Always
use proper quotation marks (‘ ’ and “ ”) in running text. These are otherwise
known as smart quotes, curly quotes, or typographers’ quotes (although
they belong to everyone, not just designers).
   Proper quotation marks give clearer indications of the beginning and
end of a quote. Being directional they usher along the flow of the text,
whereas neutral primes appear as tiny hindering wedges through a passage.
   When nesting quotes, the predominant British style is to have single
quotation marks surrounding double quotation marks: ‘The “stunt typog-
rapher” learns the fickleness of rich men who hate to read.’ American style
prefers double quotes first, with single quotes nested: “The ‘stunt typog-
rapher’ learns the fickleness of rich men who hate to read.” In HTML you
can use &ldquo; and &rdquo; entities for “ ”. The equivalent entities for ‘ ’
are &lsquo; and &rsquo;.
73   Symbols, signs and accents




     Across Europe there are even greater differences in quotation mark nota-
     tion1, with quotes commonly indicated with guillemets (« » and ‹ ›) and
     baseline commas („ “ and ‚ ’) in varying combinations. Use the marks
     appropriate to the text.

     Don’t use italic brackets
     Italic parentheses and brackets, even when properly redrawn, are sloped
     versions of their upright selves. This gives them an awkward unbalanced
     stance which can unsettle the text they enclose. Use upright brackets to
     surround italicised passages and within italicised text. You will need to
     mark up text accurately and, in some cases, with additional tags:

         Their adopted language [<i>lingua franca</i>] is French.

     Their adopted language [lingua franca] is French.

         <cite>Nobody <span class="paren">(</span>save the other
         craftsmen<span class="paren">)</span> will appreciate half
         your skill.</cite>

     Nobody (save the other craftsmen) will appreciate half your skill.

     Don’t overuse or over-elaborate ampersands
     An ampersand is a contraction of two letters: an e and a t, spelling et, Latin
     for and. Over the centuries, ampersands have taken many different forms,
     the more familiar design being more akin to a treble clef than an et liga-
     ture: &. Type designers often like to let their hair down a bit when it comes
     to designing ampersands. Some fonts retain the historical origin of the
     contraction, others have evolved significantly:




     Ampersands come in many forms.




     1   International variation in quotation marks (http://wbtyp.net/66).
                                                                      Symbols, signs and accents   74




Use ampersands sparingly. Always use and in running text unless you par-
ticularly want to effect a historical setting. Today’s readers are far less used
to ampersands, and their presence may impede and interrupt progress
through the text.
   Some style guides say you should only ever use an ampersand when
one appears in a name, such as Selfridges & Co. Other styles give leeway to
use ampersands in headings and titles provided they are used consistently.
In The Elements of Typographic Style, Robert Bringhurst writes:

    In heads and titles, use the best available ampersand.

This advice seems to have been taken to heart by many designers and
blown out of all proportion. Bringhurst is not saying to replace plain
ampersands with elaborate ones. He is not asking us to use the fanciest
ampersand available. Unless your goal is decoration or embellishment,
there is nothing wrong with a nice plain ampersand in a title. There is cer-
tainly no excuse for sticking a Baskerville italic ampersand in the middle
of a Helvetica subheading.



    also probably no coincidence that among first uses of
    symbols we have on record appear to be either records
    of (or how-to instructions on) hunting.

    Recognition & Reading

    What has all this to do with the life of modern man, and
    especially with reading? Well, most of us may have left
    the woods to live in towns and cities, but…

An italic Baskerville ampersand does not belong in a Helvetica heading.


Bringhurst’s point is that where you are using an ampersand, particularly
in a heading, be aware that some ampersands are a bit ugly or might not
be in keeping with the spirit of your text. Your first port of call in this
instance is to turn to the italic ampersand as an alternative, as these are
often more attractive than in the roman (regular upright) font.
75   Symbols, signs and accents




     You may prefer Palatino’s flowing italic ampersand to its chiselled roman counterpart.


     Ampersands are extremely useful where space is limited. Use them in
     tables, charts, captions, or anywhere character count is at a premium. You
     must use the entity &amp; in HTML – you cannot insert ampersands on
     their own as they have a reserved meaning (for forming character entities).

     Other punctuation
     Use a proper ellipsis (…) instead of three full stops. You can insert this in
     HTML using a &hellip; entity.
        Use a proper multiplication sign instead of an x when specifying
     dimensions. An x looks particularly wrong when using a serif typeface.
     Thus: Country folk drive 4 × 4 vehicles; A4 paper is 210 × 297 mm. Use
     &times; to insert a multiplication sign into HTML.
        Primes look very much like neutral quotes, but are different characters
     with specific meanings. Primes are often slightly sloped, whereas neutral
     quotes are necessarily straight. Always use primes where the text signifies
     feet and inches, and minutes and seconds. Thus: He was 6′ 4″ and full of
     muscle; Brighton is located at 50°50′35″N 0°07 ′53″ W. Always use a proper
     degree symbol (°) rather than a raised or superscript o. You can insert a
     single prime into HTML using &prime;, a double prime using &Prime;
     (note the capitalisation), and degrees through &deg;.

     Use UTF-8 in preference to entities
     Before HTML 4.01 was standardised in 1999, web pages were only allowed
     to be written using characters from a set defined by ISO-8859-1. This char-
     acter set allowed for 191 printable characters, comprising ASCII plus the
     so-called Latin-1 supplement of western European accents and some addi-
     tional symbols. Any glyphs outside that range – including almost all the
     quotation marks, dashes and other signs mentioned so far – needed an
     entity such as &ndash; to display the glyph. I have included the entity
                                                     Symbols, signs and accents   76




codes for most of the symbols I have mentioned so far; however, they
are no longer strictly necessary. With HTML 4.01 came the ability to use
a character encoding technology called UTF-8. Enable this by including
a <meta> tag:

    <meta charset="utf-8">

This means you can use any character defined by Unicode (of which there
are over one hundred thousand) directly in a web page without the need
for typing out an entity code. There are four exceptions, which must all
use entities as they have a special meaning in HTML:

<        &lt;

>        &gt;

"        &quot;

&        &amp;


It is far from obvious how to input, for example, an em dash directly into
your HTML. Rather like a secret move in a computer game, you can input
a special character through a sequence of keystrokes. These vary wildly
between operating systems, as shown on the following page.

Automate character substitution whenever possible
We established earlier that as a web typographer you are unlikely to be
typesetting the actual words of a given page, the implication being that
you will rarely have the opportunity to get your hands dirty and correct
hyphens with dashes, swap in proper quotation marks, and so on. How-
ever, all is not lost. Dozens of pieces of software are available to plug in
to content management systems, which will automatically do the conver-
sions for you.
                   77   Symbols, signs and accents




Symbol                        Windows                Mac     iOS            HTML

    Hair space                alt + 200A             none    none           &#8202;

    Thin space                alt + 2009             none    none           &thinsp;

– En dash                     alt + 0150             ⌥+-     123 → hold -   &ndash;

— Em dash                     alt + 0151             ⇧+⌥+-   123 → hold -   &mdash;

− Minus                       none                   none      → !?#        &minus;

× Multiply                    alt + 0215             none      → !?#        &times;

÷ Divide                      alt + 0247             ⌥+/       → !?#        &divide;

‘   Left single quote         alt + 0145             ⌥+]     123 → hold '   &lsquo;

’   Right single quote        alt + 0146             ⇧+⌥+]   123 → hold '   &lsquo;

“   Left double quote         alt + 0147             ⌥+[     123 → hold "   &ldquo;

”   Right double quote        alt + 0148             ⇧+⌥+[   123 → hold "   &rdquo;

& Ampersand                   ⇧+7                    ⇧+7     123 → &        &amp;

… Ellipsis                    alt + 0133             ⌥+;     123 → hold .   &hellip;

'   Single prime              none                   none    none           &prime;

"   Double prime              none                   none    none           &Prime;

°   Degree                    alt + 0176             ⇧+⌥+8   123 → hold 0   &deg;

·   Middle dot                alt + 0183             ⇧+⌥+9   123 → hold -   &middot;

•   Bullet                    alt + 0149             ⌥+8     123 → hold -   &bull;

© Copyright                   alt + 0169             ⌥+g       → !?#        &copy;

® Registered trademark alt + 0174                    ⌥+r       → !?#        &reg;

™ Trademark                   alt + 0153             ⌥+2       → !?#        &trade;
                                                      Ligatures and abbreviations   78




Ligatures and
abbreviations

Just as there are different forms of punctuation, so there are alter-
native versions of letters and character combinations designed for
readability and usability, and aesthetic and historical purposes.


Use standard ligatures for improved legibility
A ligature is a single glyph formed by combining two or more characters.
Some ligatures occur as accepted (if increasingly outdated) forms of spell-
ing, such as the æ in encyclopædia and the œ in œuvre. More frequently, liga-
tures are used to prevent unsightly and awkward clashes between adjacent
letters. For example, the tittle (dot) on a lowercase i can sometimes clash
with the hood of a preceding f. You can prevent this collision by replacing
the f and the i with an ﬁ ligature which harmoniously joins the two letter-
forms together.




Plantin’s fi ligature prevents a collision.


The clash of letters is generally more unsightly than adversely affecting
legibility, but replacing the letters with a ligature improves the visual flow
of the text and contributes to a smoother experience for your reader. The
ﬁ glyph is an example of a standard or common ligature. In letterpress days,
this glyph would have been cast as a single sort.
   79   Ligatures and abbreviations




        Letterpress ligatures (mirrored for clarity). © Emma Charleston


        There is no particular specification to denote which ligatures are ‘common’.
        It depends on which character pairs need replacing in any given typeface
        design. Typically, ligatures are required where an f is involved, and this set
        is most often included:




ﬁght oﬃce ﬂight piﬄe fjord
        Introducing OpenType
        In earlier days of digital typesetting, typographers would have swapped
        out the individual letters one by one and replaced them with a ligature
        glyph. Early font formats were severely limited in the number of charac-
        ters they could contain in a single file: PostScript Type 1, for example, is
        limited to 256 characters per file. This meant that glyphs such as ligatures
        would often need to be accessed from a separate font file containing only
        alternate characters, and rarely in any way that was standardised from one
        font to the next. This complicated the designer’s job considerably. That all
        changed in 1996 with the introduction of OpenType technology.
                                                                Ligatures and abbreviations    80




OpenType is a cross-platform font file format developed jointly by Adobe
and Microsoft. Unlike earlier file formats, OpenType fonts can contain
many thousands of characters – as many as 65,535. If a legacy font file
format is a single paring knife, with its simple set of upper- and lowercase
letters, numbers and basic punctuation, then OpenType is a Swiss Army
knife of multiple blades and widgets, providing not just the basic char-
acters, but those for multiple languages, and assortments of alternative
glyphs too – all in one file.




                             Mac and                                       Regular
                             Windows

    Stylistic sets,                                                                             Languages
                                                                                                Central European,
    alternates
                                                                                                Turkish, Greek,
    and forms                                                                                   Cyrillic, Arabic, etc.




    Ornaments
    and borders



                                                                                     Figures
              Small capitals,                                                        Old-style/Lining
                                                                                     Tabular/Proportional
              petite capitals
                                                                                     Ordinals
              and titling capitals                                                   Fractions
                                                                                     Superscript/Superior
                                                                                     Subscript/Inferior
                                                Ligatures, swashes and               Numerator/Denominator
                                                contextual alternatives



OpenType is the Swiss Army knife of font formats.


OpenType is more than just a way to store lots of glyphs in one file; it is
smart too. OpenType includes programmable automatic substitutions, a
simple one being ligature substitution. This means that an f followed by
an i can automatically be replaced by an ﬁ glyph without any manual
intervention (beyond turning on that setting in OpenType-savvy type-
setting software).
81   Ligatures and abbreviations




     By coincidence, OpenType was introduced in the same year as CSS (1996),
     but it took until a 2011 draft of CSS3 for OpenType features to be made
     available to web designers. It took a further five years for OpenType to gain
     universal support across modern web browsers. It is now a welcome and
     accepted tool in our box.
        OpenType as implemented in CSS is an excellent example of progressive
     enhancement. Because OpenType replaces regular characters with specially
     designed ones, if OpenType is not supported then the regular characters
     are displayed. Readability and aesthetics may be impaired, but the con-
     tent remains.

     How to use OpenType ligatures in CSS
     In all typesetting software, including web browsers, common ligatures
     are usually turned on by default. Most fonts – particularly free or cheap
     ones – don’t contain ligatures, but any professional font that needs them
     will have ligatures included. You can control ligatures in CSS through the
     font-variant-ligatures property. To ensure that common ligatures are
     turned on through all your text, use:

        body { font-variant-ligatures: common-ligatures; }

     To turn off all common ligatures:

        body { font-variant-ligatures: no-common-ligatures; }

     Turning off common ligatures is not recommended – CSS3 requires that
     they should be enabled by default. However, OpenType features do cause
     a small performance hit so this could be important under circumstances
     where processor speeds are severely limited or at an absolute premium.
     If you need to turn off common ligatures, use a typeface which does not
     require ligatures in the first place. Good examples include most sans serif
     fonts and many typefaces designed especially for lower-resolution screens
     such as Georgia.

     Hide legacy OpenType support from modern browsers
     The correct way to toggle ligatures is with the font-variant-ligatures
     property. But when browsers first started supporting OpenType, they
     only supported the low-level property font-feature-settings, which
     was exclusively intended as a way of selecting OpenType features that are
     not otherwise accessible in CSS. Browser makers used this property as a
                                                       Ligatures and abbreviations   82




shortcut while they were perfecting OpenType support. Unfortunately,
some took many years to replace this temporary solution. (At the time of
writing, Microsoft still hasn’t rectified this.)
    To let modern browsers use the correct font-variant- properties,
while ensuring only legacy browsers use font-feature-settings
instead, you can use an @supports rule to check if the browser supports
font-variant-position. @supports is a really simple, powerful way for
you to provide styles to browsers that either do or don’t support a given
set of properties or values.

    body {
       font-feature-settings: "liga" 1;
    }

    @supports (font-variant-ligatures: common-ligatures) {
       body {
    		font-feature-settings: normal;
    		font-variant-ligatures: common-ligatures;
       }
    }

The code snippet shown above turns on common ligatures using
font-feature-settings with "liga" 1. Then the @supports rule asks if
the browser supports font-variant-ligatures:common-ligatures (you
must always specify a property and a value). If that’s the case, common
ligatures are turned on with the font-variant-ligatures property and
font-feature-settings is reset to normal.
    If you’re thinking the "liga" 1 value doesn’t look very CSS-like, you’d
be right. The seemingly arcane nature of the syntax reflects the property’s
intended use as only a low-level control. The 1 part is easy: it turns the
feature on; use 0 to turn it off. The liga is a case-sensitive OpenType fea-
ture tag1. A feature tag is one of the blades on the metaphorical OpenType
Swiss Army knife. The feature provides instructions to the browser about
how to use certain glyphs in a font; in this case, how to replace regular
characters with standard ligatures. The font-feature-settings property
takes a comma-separated list of feature tags.
   Always use font-variant- and its related subproperties (more on
those later). Because font-feature-settings is a low-level property it will

1   List of OpenType features (http://wbtyp.net/71).
    83   Ligatures and abbreviations




         override itself. For example, the following code sets numbers throughout
         the document to be set as old-style numerals, with elements having a class
         of dlig given discretionary ligatures:

             body { font-feature-settings: "onum" 1; }

             .dlig { font-feature-settings: "dlig" 1; }

         However, all inherited font-feature-settings values are overridden
         when the property is reapplied. In the example above, you might expect
         elements with a class of dlig to also have old-style numerals, but because
         onum is omitted from the second declaration, old-style numerals are turned
         off again. To fix this you could repeat the onum value in the class rule:

             .dlig { font-feature-settings: "onum" 1, "dlig" 1; }


         Use alternative ligatures judiciously
         There are many other ligatures besides standard ones. They exist for his-
         torical and stylistic purposes, the latter known as discretionary ligatures.
         A typical discretionary ligature might join a single-storey letter with an
         adjacent ascender using a dainty loop, harking back to handwriting, and
         giving the impression of small child holding hands with a parent.




ch ck ct fb ffy fh fr gi in
im ip sh si sky sp st LA OO
         Discretionary ligatures in Esta Pro.


         The clue to applying discretionary ligatures is in the name: use them with
         discretion. A Victorian reader would have found most of these ligatures
         quite normal, but for today’s reader they are unusual and serve only to
         interrupt the reading experience when used in running text. Treat discre-
         tionary ligatures as purely decorative: avoid using them unless the text
         you are designing requires a specific historical setting or deliberate sense
         of pretentiousness (or grandeur, at a push).
                                                                   Ligatures and abbreviations   84




That said, historical and discretionary ligatures can look attractive in
display text or large heading settings. To turn on both discretionary and
historical ligatures, use spaces to separate the property values:

    font-variant-ligatures: discretionary-ligatures
       historical-ligatures

For legacy browsers requiring font-feature-settings, use the dlig and
hist OpenType feature tags:

    font-feature-settings: "dlig" 1, "hist" 1

There is no standard identifying which ligatures are deemed common,
which are defined as historical, and which are discretionary. It is down to
the type designer to make these distinctions should they choose to design
ligatures for their typeface at all.


Use real small caps
English and other Latin-based alphabets, as well as Greek and Cyrillic, use
a bicameral script: the letters have both majuscule and minuscule forms.
Put another way, we have both uppercase and lowercase letters. The term
uppercase comes from the common arrangement of type cases used to hold
the movable type for letterpress printing; traditionally, capital letters are
kept in a separate case above the minuscule sorts.




Upper and lower type cases containing moveable type. © Carole Mullen
85   Ligatures and abbreviations




     While we use a bicameral script, there are more than two forms of each
     letter available to typographers. In addition to the familiar lower- and
     uppercase letters, we also have small caps. These are, as the name implies,
     small capital letters, about the same height as the x-height of the lower-
     case letters.
         Small caps are most often used for abbreviations (chiefly initialisms
     and acronyms), subheadings or run-in text at the beginning of chapters
     and sections. You can also use them as an alternative to bold or italics in
     some situations, such as providing LIGHT EMPHASIS without changing
     weight or slope.
         Online etiquette has it that writing IN CAPITALS is akin to SHOUTING
     and is thus undesirable – unless shouting is your aim. The same conven-
     tion can be applied to all text. If you want to shout, by all means SHOUT, but
     if you want to write strings of capitals like NASA and UNESCO without call-
     ing unwarranted attention to their presence, you can turn to small caps.
         True small caps are not simply capital letters made smaller; they are
     drawn differently by type designers. Small caps are usually squatter and
     bolder than equivalently resized uppercase letterforms, to ensure they sit
     well next to lowercase letters. If you were to simply shrink down a regular
     capital letter, the result would look skinny, spindly and generally out of place.



         operates JPL for NASA programs
         operates JPL for NASA programs
         operates jpl for nasa programs
     Top: Regular uppercase. Middle: Uppercase reduced. Bottom: True small caps.


     A font with well-designed small caps will not just include a full alphabet
     along with accents, but also specially designed numerals and punctuation
     to sit perfectly together. Compare regular caps and numerals with properly
     designed small caps characters: THIRTY (30)! with THIRTY (30)! To turn
     on small caps, use the font-variant-caps property:

         abbr.smallcaps { font-variant-caps: small-caps; }
                                                      Ligatures and abbreviations   86




Following convention in digital typography, the small-caps value will
only replace lowercase letters with small caps. It’s more likely, and a better
progressive enhancement, that you will want to replace uppercase letters
with small caps. To do this, use the all-small-caps value, which will turn
both lowercase and uppercase letters into small caps:

   abbr.smallcaps { font-variant-caps: all-small-caps; }

The equivalent for legacy browsers is to reference the small-caps (smcp)
and caps-to-small-caps (c2sc) OpenType feature tags:

   font-feature-settings: "smcp" 1, "c2sc" 1

Sometimes fonts only have a smcp feature specified. This means that you
won’t be able to turn full caps into proper small caps without transforming
them into lowercase letters first:

   text-transform: lowercase

A word of warning: when you use font-variant-caps and you specify
small-caps or all-small-caps, but small caps glyphs are not available
for a given font, browsers will simulate a small-caps font by transforming
the text into regular capitals and reducing the font size, thus creating the
ugly effect illustrated earlier.
   You don’t always have to use small caps for acronyms and abbrevia-
tions. It is a matter of style, and you could quite happily use full caps if
you prefer. As much as it can be important that abbreviations don’t shout
and distract, it is equally important that small caps seem natural and fit-
ting within the text. In particular, avoid using small caps within Title Case
Headings: they’ll stand out like a sore thumb – use full caps instead.
87   Hierarchy and scale




     Hierarchy and scale

     The structure of a website is communicated through a typo-
     graphic system. A good system makes documents scannable and
     easy to grasp.


     Establish the structure up front
     First, you’ll need to understand the hierarchy and structure for yourself.
     What are the aspects of the content? How many levels of headings are
     required? Are there notes and captions? Is there any small print?

     Don’t rely on size alone for differentiation
     The primary role of your typographic system is to provide differentiation
     to denote hierarchy. Major headings should immediately look different
     from subheadings; emphasised text should stand out from surrounding
     prose; quotations should be distinct from original copy; notes and small
     print should be visually subordinate to the main text.
         There are many long-established methods of implying hierarchy. Text
     size, certainly, but it’s not the only one. Consider also: weight, style (italics
     and CAPITALISATION), typeface, colour, spacing and proximity. The most
     important things don’t always have to be the largest; they just need to be
     further distinguished from other elements. In other words, they need more
     contrast. Whatever you choose, just change one attribute at a time. Too
     much variation between elements of the content will lead to a messy, unin-
     telligible system and a distracting experience overall.


     Always size type using a scale
     The simplest expression of a type scale is a single size used throughout. This
     was the approach used by the very earliest typographers and printers, who
     set books in a single font – one typeface at one size – and used ornamenta-
     tion and spacing to indicate chapters and other structures. Their approach
     would have been mandated by the expense required to cut and found metal
                                                              Hierarchy and scale   88




type at that time. But you’re likely to need more than one font size to effec-
tively convey hierarchy and semantics. Consistency is the key in making
meaning apparent. To achieve consistency, use a scale and stick to it.
   A type scale provides a predefined set of type sizes. By design, this limits
your choices and forces rigour and consistency into your typesetting. In
these days of digital type, we’re very used to having an infinite choice of
type size, right down to fractions of a pixel. In the days of moveable type
you would have had no option but to use a scale, as offered by the sizes of
metal (and wooden) sorts in your type drawers.
    During the sixteenth century, European typographers began to stand-
ardise the set of sizes at which those sorts were available. Over four hun-
dred years later, that scale is still with us in the form of presets in the
word-processing and layout software we use today. It remains a bedrock
of modern typography, providing a balanced and harmonious progression
of font sizes.




    6 7 8 9 10 11 12 14 16     18   21   24   36    48       60        72



The classic typographic scale is often compared to a musical scale, and
with good reason. The sizes 6, 12, 24 and 48 are all present in the scale;
 there is a precise doubling in magnitude at various points as the text size
 is increased. Consequently, a recurring ratio within the classic typographic
 scale is 2:1. That same ratio can be found in the harmonics manifested in
 music. Each C note on a piano, for example, vibrates at twice the frequency
 of the C one octave lower.
     A musical scale is defined by a sequence of notes between the octaves.
The mathematical relationships between the notes of a scale are funda-
 mentally what gives us musical harmony (and discord), and just as these
 relationships are pleasing (or not) to our ears, so the harmonics of visual
 relationships can be pleasing or jarring to our eyes.
     Music occurs not just in space but in time, and it is often the progression
 from one harmony to another that we find pleasing, rather than one par-
 ticular harmonic effect in itself. Typography also occurs in time: text is pri-
 marily read rather than looked at. As in music, progressions in typography
– where one text size leads to another – can be agreeable or disconcerting.
                   89   Hierarchy and scale




                        In music, the distance between any two notes (minor third, perfect fifth,
                        octave, major ninth, and so on) is known as an interval. In typography,
                        the distance between type sizes is also described as an interval, but in this
                        case interval is defined as the number of type sizes between one size and
                        its double. For example, in the classic typographic scale we can see that
                        the interval is five. Between 12 and 24 there are five sizes: 12, 14, 16, 18 and
                        21. We can confirm this by looking at the next interval down, which also
                        has fives sizes: 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10. You may have noticed this interval also
                        contains a size of 11, which is an anomaly, as we shall see.
                            Knowing the ratio and interval provides us with enough information
                        to mathematically describe the classic typographic scale, enabling us to
                        recalculate and extend the scale accordingly:




                        Comparing our calculated sizes to the values arrived at 400 years ago, it’s
                        clear the intuition of the Renaissance typographers was extremely close,
                        with just a few deviations:




6 7 8 9 10   12 14 16 18 21    24   28   32   36   42    48      55       63       73         84           96




6 7 8 9 10 11 12 14 16 18 21   24             36         48               60       72         84           96
                                                             Hierarchy and scale   90




First there is the additional 11 pt, then there are four lost ‘notes’ – sizes
which would be perfectly harmonic within the scale. Furthermore, two of
the notes are flat: the 60 pt and 72 pt sizes are off slightly. These two font
sizes appear to be rounded down to the nearest multiple of the pica (1 pica
equals 12 pt), so this may have been a practicality required for the tooling
and manufacture of early printing processes.
   The scale all web browsers use as a default for headings and other ele-
ments closely matches the classic typographic scale. There are two slight
deviations from both the classic and calculated scale. Given a base text
size of 16 px, <h5> and <small> elements are both rendered at 13 px, and
<h3> elements are sized at 19 px. Browsers size HTML elements relatively,
so the discrepancies may be down to a lack of precision in their internal
style sheets.




   h6       h5         h4          h3          h2 h1
    11        13         16          19            24               32




Unlike the limitations of physical type, modern methods of digital type-
setting – and CSS itself – enable type sizes to fall outside the notes of
the classic scale. This freedom has resulted in a typographic free-for-all,
allowing designers to pick sizes which may or may not be related to one
another. This is akin to composing a discordant piece of music: clashing
notes, clashing type. If typographic dissonance is what you’re after, that’s
fine. If, however, the text you are setting will benefit from harmony and
concord – as is almost always the case – stick to the notes in a scale. Even
then, limit the number of different sizes you use – three is a good starting
point to keep things simple for your reader.
    Designs using a great many font sizes, however consistently, may convey
the semantics of the text comprehensively, but will nonetheless appear
confusing and complicated. To be readily made sense of, your typesetting
should strike a single chord, not play out an entire melody.
91   Hierarchy and scale




     Choose your smallest size first
     Broadly speaking there are three kinds of text, each of which can take on
     a different magnitude:

     1. Reference (small). Reference text includes small print, notes and spe-
        cialist purposes such as bibliographies, dictionaries and data presenta-
        tion. Reference text does not have to be set small, but in print it often
        is for economic reasons. This kind of text is not read in the immersive
        manner of running copy, so even where printing costs are not an issue,
        smaller text can be accommodated.
     2. Reading (medium). Text set for immersive reading. This usually
        includes headings which may need to be sized differently to set them
        off from the body text.
     3. Display (large). Display text is there to make an impact, evoke an
        emotional response and set a tone. It is intended to be looked at before
        it is read, and is thus set larger.

     When using a type scale, identify your smallest size first and then go bigger.
     This will help you ensure the smallest text is still comfortably legible.
        It is possible to start with your body text size, but always identify the
     smallest text next. Fail to do so and you may end up inside a trap many
     designers have fallen into: you choose undersized body text, then uncover
     a requirement for subordinate text which, when set small enough to be
     distinguished from the body text, ends up illegible.

     Use alternative modular scales to suit the content
     The classic typographic scale has been used for centuries. If set correctly,
     designs using only sizes found in this scale will appear pleasing to the eye.
     It could be the only scale you ever need. Other scales, though, are both
     possible and potentially useful.
         The classic typographic sequence is a modular scale; a prearranged set of
     harmonious proportions which have a meaningful foundation. Any single
     modular scale can be described using the following equation, where fi is
     the text size at the ith point in the scale:




     f ᵢ = type size, f ₀ = base size, r = ratio, i = interval, n = point on scale
                                                              Hierarchy and scale   92




Applying the modular scale equation to the classic typographic sequence,             A pica is an imperial
the meaningful foundation – or base size – is 12, reflecting the 12 pt body          unit of length.
                                                                                     6 picas = 1 inch.
text often used in print, and the 12 pt found in a pica. As mentioned ear-
lier, the interval i is 5, and the ratio r settled on 400 years ago is 2:1, or 2
in decimal terms. The mathematical sequence we derived previously was
calculated by plugging these numbers into the equation as follows:




f ᵢ = type size, n = point on scale


Equations like this, while relatively simple, are not expected to be used
directly (although they can be). Instead, they serve to demonstrate that
typography is a craft rather than an art, and that there are readily repeatable
patterns we can rely on to support and enable creative solutions to design
problems. In the case of a modular scale, you can create a scale tailored
to your needs, and stick to the scale to ensure consistency in your design.
    By changing the base size, interval and, in particular, the ratio you
can create different modular scales customised to the needs of the text
and the setting. Online calculators such as Tim Brown’s Modular Scale
(http://wbtyp.net/69) and this author’s Simple Scale (http://wbtyp.net/73)
can do the maths for you and make it quick to experiment.
    To define your own modular scale, start by specifying the base size:
simply use the size of your body text; for example, 16. For the ratio you
can pick a culturally or historically relevant number to provide you with
a visual harmony not found in layouts that use arbitrary or easily divisi-
ble numbers. Many people might immediately reach for the golden ratio φ
(1.618 as a decimal) – that so-called divine number supposedly appear-
ing repeatedly in nature and all manner of classical art and architecture.
The golden ratio would indeed give you a pleasant harmonious type scale,
although it is unlikely to have any relationship to the content or propor-
tions of your reader’s screen.
    In the world around us and online, musical ratios are at least as com-
monplace as the golden ratio. In particular, they can be found in the aspect
ratios of many screens, and they appear in the dimensions of much dig-
ital imagery. For example, the aspect ratio of most digital SLR cameras is
3:2, a perfect fifth (1.5 as a decimal). A perfect fourth is 4:3 (1.333), and is
the aspect ratio of lots of other digital photography, particularly compact
                                     93    Hierarchy and scale




                                           cameras and many phones. If your content includes significant amounts
                                           of photography, you can tie your text to the images by using a related scale.

                                          Adjust the text size and scale for different screens
                                           Choose text sizes of similar magnitudes to the browser defaults and you
                                           will have a set of proportions eminently suitable for small screens. Apply
                                           those same sizes to larger screens, where bigger text can be accommodated,
                                           and you will diminish the contrast necessary for your reader to determine
                                           the hierarchy at a glance.




                                                                       Hierarchy and meaning
                                                                       The structure and semantics of a website are communicated through a
                                                                       typographic system. Your reader should be able to pick up this undocumented
                                                                       visual language intuitively. A good system makes documents scannable, implies
Hierarchy and                                                          meaning and provides consistency.

meaning                                                                Establish the structure up front
The structure and semantics of a                                       First, you’ll need to understand the hierarchy and structure for yourself. What are
website are communicated                                               the aspects of the content? How many levels of headings are required? Are there
through a typographic system.                                          notes and captions? Does the text contain tables, reference material or asides?
                                                                       How much variation in emphasis is there? Are there quotes and extracts?
Establish the structure
                                                                       Don’t rely on size alone for differentiation
up front
                                                                       To denote hierarchy and meaning, the primary role of your typographic system
First, you’ll need to understand
                                                                       is to provide differentiation. Major headings should immediately look different
the hierarchy and structure for
                                                                       from subheadings; emphasised text should stand out from surrounding prose;
yourself. What are the aspects of
                                                                       quotations should be distinct from original copy; notes and small print should be
the content?
                                                                       visually subordinate to the main text.
Don’t rely on size alone for
                                                                       There are many long-established methods of implying hierarchy and meaning.
differentiation                                                        Text size, certainly, but it’s not the only one. Consider also: weight, style (italics
                                                                       and CAPITALISATION), typeface, colour, spacing and proximity. The most
To denote hierarchy and
                                                                       important things don’t always have to be the largest; they just need to be
meaning, the primary role of your
                                                                       further distinguished from other elements. In other words, they need more
typographic system is to provide
                                                                       contrast. Whatever you choose, just change one attribute at a time. Too much
differentiation. Major headings
                                                                       variation between elements of the content will lead to a messy, unintelligible
should immediately look different
                                                                       system and a distracting experience overall.
from subheadings; emphasised
text should stand out from
surrounding prose; quotations
should be distinct from original
copy; notes and small print
should be visually subordinate to
                                           Default text sizes work well on smartphones but lack contrast and impact on large screens.
the main text.

There are many long-established
methods of implying hierarchy
and meaning. Text size, certainly,         It’s not strictly necessary to choose a different scale for larger screens, par-
but it’s not the only one.
Consider also: weight, style
(italics and CAPITALISATION),              ticularly if you are relating your choice of text scale to the aspect ratio of
typeface, colour, spacing and
proximity. The most important
things don’t always have to be
                                           other content elements. Simply choose larger sizes from within the scale.
the largest; they just need to be
further distinguished from other
elements. In other words, they
                                           For example, using a single scale based on a perfect fourth 4:3 ratio, you
need more contrast. Whatever
you choose, just change one
attribute at a time. Too much
                                           could pick different, incrementally bigger sizes for small, medium and
                                           larger screens:


   12        14         16           18   21     25      28       33            38                44                           51                   58          67   78

                       h4                 h3 h2                  h1
                                                                                                                         h1
                                                                                                                                                                     h1
                                     h4        h3                h2
                                          h4           h3                                    h2
                                                                                                                    Hierarchy and scale   94




Using media queries to target larger screens with bigger text, your CSS
would be:

    h1 { font-size: 2.0625rem; /* 33px */ }
    h2 { font-size: 1.5625rem; /* 25px */ }
    h3 { font-size: 1.3125rem; /* 21px */ }
    h4 { font-size: 1rem;			 /* 16px */ }
    p { font-size: 1rem;			 /* 16px */ }

    @media screen and (min-width: 60em) {
       h1 { font-size: 3.1875rem; /* 51px */ }
       h2 { font-size: 2.0625rem; /* 33px */ }
       h3 { font-size: 1.5625rem; /* 25px */ }
       h4 { font-size: 1.125rem; /* 18px */ }
       p { font-size: 1.125rem		 /* 18px */ }
    }

    @media screen and (min-width: 120em) {
       h1 { font-size: 4.875rem; /* 78px */ }
       h2 { font-size: 2.75rem;		 /* 44px */ }
       h3 { font-size: 1.75rem;		 /* 28px */ }
       h4 { font-size: 1.3125rem; /* 21px */ }
       p { font-size: 1.3125rem; /* 21px */ }
    }




                           Hierarchy and meaning
                           The structure and semantics of a website are communicated through a
                           typographic system. Your reader should be able to pick up this undocumented
                           visual language intuitively. A good system makes documents scannable, implies
                           meaning and provides consistency.


                           Establish the structure up front
                           First, you’ll need to understand the hierarchy and structure for yourself. What are
                           the aspects of the content? How many levels of headings are required? Are there
                           notes and captions? Does the text contain tables, reference material or asides?
                           How much variation in emphasis is there? Are there quotes and extracts?

                           Don’t rely on size alone for differentiation
                           To denote hierarchy and meaning, the primary role of your typographic system
                           is to provide differentiation. Major headings should immediately look different
                           from subheadings; emphasised text should stand out from surrounding prose;
                           quotations should be distinct from original copy; notes and small print should be
                           visually subordinate to the main text.

                           There are many long-established methods of implying hierarchy and meaning.
                           Text size, certainly, but it’s not the only one. Consider also: weight, style (italics
                           and CAPITALISATION), typeface, colour, spacing and proximity. The most
                           important things don’t always have to be the largest; they just need to be
                           further distinguished from other elements. In other words, they need more
                           contrast. Whatever you choose, just change one attribute at a time. Too much
                           variation between elements of the content will lead to a messy, unintelligible
                           system and a distracting experience overall.

Exaggerating the type sizes for larger screen sizes gives a more effective sense of proportion.
                       95   Hierarchy and scale




                            Take screen height into account
Cinemascopic displays       Exponentially increasing text size based on viewport width will work
  are particularly wide     well in most situations, but it relies on one key assumption: that view-
  and shallow, with an
   aspect ratio of 21:9.    port height increases proportionally with the width. A very wide viewport
                            might, on the face of it, demand significantly large headings. However, if
                            the window height is very shallow, perhaps due to a configuration by your
                            reader, or an uncommon device shape, then the text could be dispropor-
                            tionately large or even cropped.
                                In the spirit of responsive design, account for this possibility and ensure
                            that larger text is only displayed in viewports which are both wider and
                            taller. Include a height-based feature in your media queries; for example:

                               @media screen and (min-width: 60em) and (min-height: 30em)
                                  { … }

                               @media screen and (min-width: 120em) and (min-height: 60em)
                                  { … }

                            Next we’ll learn how to add semantics to your system and use your scales
                            to imply meaning.
                                                        Meaning and semantics   96




Meaning and
semantics

Your typographic system provides an undocumented visual lan-
guage which your reader should be able to pick up intuitively.
A good system confers meaning, and provides differentiation
and consistency.


Establish the semantics up front
If you have control over the underlying HTML then you will be in the envi-
able position of conveying the meaning and structural semantics under
the hood of the website, as well as the visual interpretation of that on top.
If the HTML is coded well it will give you a good guide to the elements
which you’ll need to provide styles for. Either way, the onus is on you
to comprehend the text in advance; or if the text doesn’t yet exist, to get
as good an understanding as possible of what textual components are
likely to come your way. Does the text contain tables, reference material
or asides? How much variation in emphasis is there? Are there quotes and
extracts? Without that knowledge up front you are designing completely
in the dark.


Headings
Headlines and headings draw your reader into the page and to sections
within the text. They help your reader perceive the structure of the text,
navigate through it and focus in on passages of interest.
   A heading must look like a heading at first glance, and you can achieve
this with more than size alone. Spacing, alignment and visual changes
including small caps, italics, bolds and condensed styles provide a diverse
palette for your type. Consider side headings and inline headings as
possible placements. You can also use a different, contrasting typeface;
97   Meaning and semantics




      for example, balancing seriffed headings against sans serif body text (see
     ‘Combining typefaces’). Change one parameter at a time – your role is to
      set headings in a form that contributes to the style of the whole.
          In this digital age of limitless font sizes, it is a revealing and challeng-
      ing assignment to set an entire page of content at one size using a single
      typeface. It’s an exercise worth undertaking to fully appreciate the pos-
      sibilities available to you as a designer. First, try to get the page to make
      sense simply through use of spacing. Then add further differences such as
      a style and weight only where additional clarification is required.




     It is possible to convey structure and meaning using just a single font size.


     When writing your CSS it is good practice to style all HTML heading levels
     (1 – 6) in order to cover future occurrences. If you expect there to only ever
     be four levels of heading, simply style your h5 and h6 headings the same
     as your h4. You won’t get differentiation this way, but you will at least
     achieve consistency should those lesser headings unexpectedly make their
     way into the content.
                                                           Meaning and semantics   98




Tighten up leading in headings
Larger text requires relatively less leading. A line height of 1.5 may be fine
for body text but large headings will be too widely spaced, to the point
that a two-line heading may look more like two separate headings. When
typesetting large text, always test your design using enough text to make
the line wrap to properly check the spacing between lines.



    Massive Supernova Visible
    Millions of Light Years from Earth
    Massive Supernova Visible
    Millions of Light Years from Earth
Heading with line height of 1.5 versus 1.


Avoid clash (unless it’s a deliberate choice)
You may find you need to set your line-height to a value of 1 (called set-
ting solid) for your headings to be spaced correctly. In doing so you run the
risk of clash. Clash happens when descenders touch or overlap ascenders,
as though a g has gone fishing and caught an f. Clash causes difficulty or
tension for your reader, and can adversely affect legibility – not something
you’d want with text as important as a heading. Always check what hap-
pens when a tightly set long heading wraps.


Mark the opening of each passage of text
Draw your reader into the prose by indicating each opening and resump-
tion of the text. If the very beginning of the material is preceded by site fur-
niture and metadata such as navigation, advertising, title, byline, date and
tags, then the opening text will need to be particularly attention-grabbing.
   Your first tactic should be to turn to white space: separate the opening
text from what precedes it by at least a couple of lines. To further accentu-
ate entry into the text, you could set the first line of the opening paragraph
in bold or, more commonly and gracefully, in small caps. This is called a
run-in and can be achieved simply using the ::first-line pseudo-ele-
ment. To bold the first line:

    p::first-line { font-weight: bold; }
                    99   Meaning and semantics




                         You can be more specific in your code and target the opening paragraph
                         of an article using the :first-of-type pseudo-class. To set the first line
                         of the first paragraph of an article in small caps:

                             article p:first-of-type::first-line {
                                font-feature-settings: "smcp" 1; /* for legacy browsers */
                             }
                             @supports (font-variant-caps: small-caps) {
                                article p:first-of-type::first-line {
                             		font-feature-settings: normal;
                             		font-variant-caps: small-caps;
                                }
                             }

                         Implement drop caps accurately or not at all
                         A classical approach to drawing a reader’s eye to the beginning of the text
                         is the decorative initial, or drop capital: a larger than usual letter at the start
                         of a paragraph. When implemented well, drop caps are effective, digni-
                         fied devices which go largely unnoticed by the reader yet still serve their
                         purpose. Poorly implemented drop caps – incorrectly sized and poorly
                         aligned – are a distracting foible, as if an orator were stumbling over their
                         opening words.
    If you’re using a        Accurately executed drop caps share a baseline with the adjoining text
web font purely for      and are tall enough to align with the cap height of the first line of text.
drop caps, it makes
    sense to subset      Drop caps do not have to be set in the same typeface as the adjoining text,
 the font to include     and frequently aren’t – think of the beautiful illuminated manuscripts in
capital letters only.    which this device originated. The main requirement, for aesthetic and
                         readability reasons, is that they adhere to the top-and-tail alignment.




                                           W
                             cap-height
                             baseline             ith great pleasure I look back t
                             baseline             moments when I learned some
                             baseline     typography, either from a Master or f
                                          practitioners. To have learned about d
                                          design from my Swiss fellows, to have
                         A two-line drop cap correctly aligning to baselines and cap‑heights.


                                          about the white space from my Ameri
                                          to have learned about the forceful imp
                                                           Meaning and semantics   100




Drop caps have two siblings: sunken caps and raised caps. Raised caps are
large initial letters which align to the baseline of the first line. Sunken caps
sit between raised and drop caps, in that they are large letters which are
taller than the first line but are located on a lower baseline.




    W                   ith great pleasure I look back to all the moments
    when I learned something new in typography, either from a
    Master
Three-line        or from fellow practitioners. To have learned about
           raised cap.

    disciplined design from my Swiss fellows, to have learned about



    W
    the white space from my American fellows, to have learned about
    the forceful impact of type from my German fellows, to have
                        ith great pleasure I look back to all the moments
    learned about wit from my English fellows, and then even more
                        when I learned something new in typography, either
    from fellows everywhere.
    from a Master or from fellow practitioners. To have learned about
    disciplined
Three-line sunken cap. design from my Swiss fellows, to have learned about

    the white space from my American fellows, to have learned about



    W
    the forceful impact of type from my German fellows, to have
                        ith great pleasure I look back to all the moments
    learned about wit from my English fellows, and then even more
                        when I learned something new in typography, either
    from fellows everywhere.
                        from a Master or from fellow practitioners. To have
    learned about disciplined design from my Swiss fellows, to have
    learned about the white space from my American fellows, to
Three-line drop cap.
    have learned about the forceful impact of type from my German
Forfellows,
     a long time,  to accurately
                       have learned    about
                                 positioned    witcaps
                                            drop    from
                                                       havemy  English
                                                            been extremelyfellows,
                                                                            dif-   and
    then
ficult        even on
        to achieve     more  from fellows
                          the web,            everywhere.
                                   particularly once  considerations of respon-
siveness are brought into the mix. They have tended to be individually
art-directed, making them expensive to create and difficult to maintain,
leaving a typographical feature that has been used for over 400 years a
relatively rare sight on the web. That is no longer the case. The advent
of the CSS Inline Layout Module Level 3 brought with it a new property,
initial-letter, which puts all the onus of alignment on browsers –
indeed the alignment in the prior examples is fine, but the kerning of the
W still leaves a lot to be desired.
101   Meaning and semantics




      The initial-letter property takes a value made up of two numbers. The
      first is the height of the drop cap, expressed in lines. The second is the
      number of lines down on which the initial cap sits. A three-line drop cap is
      achieved by selecting the first letter and setting initial-letter to 3 (you
      can omit the second number for drop caps). Adapting our earlier example:

         article p:first-of-type::first-letter {
            initial-letter: 3;
         }

      A sunken initial three lines high, and sticking up one line can be specified
      thus:

         article p:first-of-type::first-letter {
            initial-letter: 3 2;
         }

      And a three-line raised cap is achieved with:

         article p:first-of-type::first-letter {
            initial-letter: 3 1;
         }

            A variation on drop caps is to open the passage with a typographic
            symbol such as a pilcrow ¶, manicule      or fleuron . You can do
      this by adding the symbol to the opening paragraph as generated content
      and applying initial-letter as described above. For example, you can
      open a passage with a dropped fleuron as follows:

         p:first-of-type::before {
            content:" ";
         }
         p:first-of-type::first-letter {
            initial-letter: 2;
         }

      A convention of drop caps is that any opening punctuation, such as a quo-
      tation mark, is treated as if it is part of the opening letter, meaning that
      the opening punctuation is also enlarged and dropped. This behaviour is
      also mandated by CSS and will almost always be the desirable situation.
                                                          Meaning and semantics   102




The exception is when you only want to drop the punctuation but leave
the first letter intact. The fleuron in the previous example is not consid-
ered punctuation; however, a pilcrow is, which means the pilcrow and
the opening letter are both dropped even if they are separated by a space.
To prevent this happening, you can persuade a browser that the pilcrow
is not part of the first word by inserting a zero-width space (encoded in
CSS as \200B).

   p:first-of-type::before {
      content:"¶ \200B";
   }

If you have multiple sections or passages of text within a page, you can use
a fleuron to separate them. This can provide a gentle, stylish and elegant
solution, which works in settings calling for a classical touch.
    Use an <hr> between your sections and replace its standard styling
with a background image:

   hr {
      height: 1em;
      border: 0;
      background: url(fleuron.svg) center no-repeat;
      background-size: contain;
   }

In this code we have made the <hr> 1 em tall, set the background image
as an SVG, and set it to cover the element. This way the fleuron will scale
nicely when your reader changes their text settings.




A standfirst should stand first
A standfirst is a short opening paragraph often used in journalism to set
the scene or summarise the subsequent article. When prose opens with a
standfirst, make sure it is distinguishable from the rest of the text. A useful
technique, especially if the page contains many distractions and much
supplementary matter, is to set the standfirst paragraph in a larger size.
103   Meaning and semantics




      If you do this, make sure the standfirst is differentiated from any sub-
      headings of the same size – consider italicising the standfirst or choosing
      a different weight for the headings.


      Demarcate paragraphs appropriately
      Choosing the means to delineate paragraph breaks is both an aesthetic
      and a functional decision. We use paragraphs to mark individual units of
      thought, and you help your readers by giving them a pause between those
      thoughts. The boundary between one paragraph and the next should there-
      fore be clearly and simply marked.
         There is no right or wrong way to indicate a new paragraph; it’s a choice
      largely based on personal preference or house style. As with all things
      typographic, smooth the way for your reader by sticking to established
      and well-recognised patterns. Demarcate sequential paragraphs with an
      indent, or insert a space between them. But never both.
         A single line space is the most common way to delimit paragraphs
      on the web today, and it’s the default style in all browsers. However, the
      indent is still the most prevalent paragraph marker in printed books and
      publications. Before the 19th century, the insertion of a full line of white
      space between paragraphs would have been considered decadent. Printing
      was an expensive process, and paper was particularly costly (not to men-
      tion even more pricey substrates such as vellum). ‘Printing’ on a screen
      effectively removes cost as a factor, so the reading experience is the only
      currency by which web typography is measured.
         Marking paragraphs with indents benefits readers of essays, books,
      news articles and other longer-form writing. They keep the eye scanning
      down the text without interruption, and the brain engaged with the words
      (assuming the words themselves are engaging). Inserting white space
      between paragraphs impedes reading and induces your reader to skip to
      the next paragraph.
         For the same reason, the delineation provided by a line break can be
      advantageous to readers of reference material, where typically each par-
      agraph is more self-contained. The line breaks can thereby help separate
      ideas and enable purposeful scanning of the text.
         Compared with fiction and newspapers, writing on the web tends to be
      more chunked, with each paragraph holding a complete thought. This style
      of composition has the skimming reader in mind and thus lends itself
      more to line breaks between paragraphs.
                                                          Meaning and semantics   104




Indent paragraphs at least 1 em
Use at least 1 em for the paragraph indent – any less lacks clarity. Better
still, use an indent equivalent to the line height. This will create a neat
         Imagine
square of white  spacethat   you
                       between      have before you a ﬂagon of wine. You may
                                paragraphs.

    choose your own favourite vintage for this imaginary demonstra-
    tion, so that it be a deep shimmering crimson in colour.
          You have two goblets before you. One is of solid gold, wrought
    in the most exquisite patterns. The other is of crystal-clear glass,
    thinindent
A paragraph as equivalent
               a bubble,            and
                          to the line height,as  transparent.
                                             forming square.


The following CSS indents the first line of any paragraph that directly fol-
lows another by a distance equivalent to the line height:

   p {
      font-size: 1rem;
      line-height: 1.5;
      margin-bottom: 0;
   }

   p + p {
      text-indent: 1.5em;
      margin-top: 0;
   }

Never indent the first paragraph after a title, heading, table, list, image or
other interruption.

Separate paragraphs by no more than 1 em
If you use a blank line to separate paragraphs, make it no bigger than the
type size. The purpose is not to tire the eyes of your reader, merely to aid
scanning. Half the line height should be sufficient in most circumstances
and will be a suitable compromise should the text reward linear reading.

Don’t use stylised paragraph breaks without good reason
Paragraphs can also run inline using a typographic symbol such as a pilcrow
¶ to demarcate the boundaries. These are unconventional in modern type-
setting and thus prone to inducing confusion and fatigue in your reader.
105   Meaning and semantics




      Nonetheless, this setting can be attractive and even historically appropriate
      in short runs of text and under the right circumstances.


          Imagine that you have before you a ﬂagon of wine. You may choose your
          own favourite vintage for this imaginary demonstration, so that it be a
          deep shimmering crimson in colour. ¶ You have two goblets before you.
          One is of solid gold, wrought in the most exquisite patterns. The other is of
          crystal-clear glass, thin as a bubble, and as transparent. ¶ Pour and drink;
          and according to your choice of goblet, I shall know whether or not you are
          a connoisseur of wine. ¶ For if you have no feelings about wine one way or
          the other, you will want the sensation of drinking the stuﬀ out of a vessel
          that may have cost thousands of pounds; but if you are a member of that
          vanishing tribe, the amateurs of ﬁne vintages, you will choose the crystal,
          because everything about it is calculated to reveal rather than hide the
          beautiful thing which it was meant to contain.¶ Bear with me in this
          long-winded and fragrant metaphor; for you will ﬁnd that almost all the
          virtues of the perfect wine-glass have a parallel in typography. ¶ There is
          the long, thin stem that obviates ﬁngerprints on the bowl. Why? Because
          no cloud must come between your eyes and the ﬁery heart of the liquid.
          Are not the margins on book pages similarly meant to obviate the
          necessity of ﬁngering the type-page? ¶ Again: the glass is colourless or at
          the most only faintly tinged in the bowl, because the connoisseur judges
          wine partly by its colour and is impatient of anything that alters it. ¶
          There are a thousand mannerisms in typography that are as impudent and
          arbitrary as putting port in tumblers of red or green glass!

      Running paragraphs separated by pilcrows can be pretty, if tiring and unconventional.


      The effect can be achieved through generated content and the
      display:run-in property (although display:inline works reasonably
      well too, for older browsers).

          p {
             display: inline;
             display: run-in;
             margin: 0;
          }

          p + p:before {
             content: "¶ ";
          }
                                                              Meaning and semantics   106




Not all block quotes need to look like
pull-quotes
A pull-quote is a typographic device used to pull a quote out of the text to serve
a specific purpose: that of an eye-catching snippet to add visual interest
and scannability. Pull-quotes tend to be set much larger than, and in juxta-
position to, the body text. They are considered in more detail in ‘Headlines
and impact’.
   A block quote is different: it is simply a passage of cited text. In fiction
this might be a letter quoted within the story; for journalists this could be
an extract from a legal document. In other non-fiction, such as a tutorial or
blog post, it might be an excerpt from a specification or related blog post.
Whichever the case, the block quote will not warrant the attention-seeking
presentation of a pull-quote.
    Set block quotes apart from the rest of the text, but don’t give them
undue emphasis. Set them no bigger than the body text and inset from the
left margin – as a guide, use the same indent as your paragraphs. There
is no need to inset from the right margin. Consider one additional varia-
tion to set the block quote apart. Typically you would either italicise or set
slightly smaller, but not both. If you are also crediting the source of the
quote, do so by ranging the citation right, set it off using an em dash and
consider setting it smaller than the body text. For example:

   There is nothing simple or dull in achieving the transparent page. Vulgar
   ostentation is twice as easy as discipline. When you realise that ugly
   typography never effaces itself; you will be able to capture beauty as
   the wise men capture happiness by aiming at something else. The ‘stunt
   typographer’ learns the fickleness of rich men who hate to read. Not for them
   are long breaths held over serif and kern. Nobody (save the other craftsmen)
   will appreciate half your skill. But you may spend endless years of happy
   experiment in devising that crystalline goblet which is worthy to hold the
   vintage of the human mind.
                             — from The Crystal Goblet by Beatrice Warde, 1932


Hang punctuation
When quotation marks appear at the beginning of a line they nudge the
start of the text inwards, causing an unsightly gap and unevenness within
the paragraph, which can make reading a slightly jerky experience. If you
open a block quote with a quotation mark, align the first letter in the quote
with the first letter of all the other lines. To do so, hang the opening quote
107   Meaning and semantics




      mark by moving it into the margin or indent. The closing punctuation can
      simply follow on from the text without special positioning.

        “One more attribute the modern typographer must have: the capacity
         for taking great pains with seemingly unimportant detail. To him, one
         typographical point must be as important as one inch, and he must harden
         his heart against the accusation of being too fussy.”
           — Hans P. Schmoller, in ‘Book Design Today’, Printing Review, Spring 1951


      Hang punctuation by giving the opening quote mark a negative left
      margin to move it from its original position, pulling the following text
      with it. Rather than inserting the quote mark directly into the text, imply-
      ing you’d need an additional <span> to make it selectable, insert the marks
      using generated content, keeping your HTML clean and simple:

         <blockquote class="quoted">
            <p>One more attribute the modern typographer must have:
            the capacity for taking great pains with seemingly
            unimportant detail. To him, one typographical point
            must be as important as one inch, and he must harden his
            heart against the accusation of being too fussy.</p>
            <footer>— Hans P. Schmoller, in ‘Book Design Today’,
         		<cite>Printing Review</cite>, Spring 1951</footer>
         </blockquote>

      Use the CSS quotes property to specify which quotation marks you would
      like to use, and in which order. Then combine the ::before and ::after
      pseudo-elements with content:open-quote and content:close-quote
      properties to prepend and append quotation marks to the text.
          Positioning the opening quote mark using a negative margin means
      you retain the correct spacing between the punctuation and the letters.
      A drawback is that the required distance of manoeuvre will vary slightly
      from font to font. Specifying the margin using ch rather than em will at
      least tie the deviation to the width of the font rather than the independent
      em square. In the following example, the negative margin shift of -0.83 ch
      was determined by experiment for double quotes set in the font used in
      the prior block quote. There’s no fixed rule for how far to indent the quotes,
      so just use your eye (it can be a good idea to bump the text right up while
      you’re doing so).
                                                             Meaning and semantics   108




     .quoted p {
        quotes: '“' '”' '‘' '’';
     }
     .quoted p::before {
        content: open-quote;
        margin-left: -0.83ch;
     }
     .quoted p::after {
        content: close-quote;
     }


  Treat lists as text to be read
  Lists should be treated with the same reverence you would show any other
  text. If a list is inserted within a passage of text, treat it as a continuation
  and integral part of that text. Offset the list from the preceding paragraph
  or heading with a modest space – half a line would normally suffice.

  • If the list items are invariably short, needing only one or two lines,
    remove the spacing between each item. The bullet or numbering will
    provide sufficient demarcation.
  • For longer list items, apply additional separation.
  • If separating list items, use half a line or the same spacing by which
    you delineate paragraphs. Any more and your reader will need to hop,
    skip and jump from one list item to another, rather than continuing
    to read smoothly.

  For bulleted lists, indent each list item the equivalent distance of a line
  height. This will allow the bullet to sit neatly in a white square. Numbered
  lists which reach into double figures and beyond will require more space.
  Allocate this space in multiples of the line height.

1 You can save further space by removing the punctuation from numbering.
2 This is particularly true if you hang the numbering in the margin, pro-
  viding the optimum expression of continual reading.

  Removing the punctuation from a list means overriding the browser’s
  inbuilt styles. This is possible but not trivial, and gives us the opportunity
  to get to know CSS counters. First, remove the browser’s defaults and create
  a counter by using counter-reset, and giving the counter a name (a vari-
  able which can be used to continue counting in further lists):
           109   Meaning and semantics




                     ol {
                        padding-left: 0; margin-left: 0; list-style: none;
                        counter-reset: mylist;
                     }

                 Then use a ::before pseudo-element and generated content to increment
                 and place a counter (that is, an incrementing number) before the list item,
                 and move it into the margin.

                     ol li::before {
                        counter-increment: mylist;
                        content: counter(mylist);
                        margin-left: -2em; margin-right: 1em;
                     }

                 In list-led text, such as bibliographies, you can use outdents instead. These
                 can be achieved by combining a negative text-indent with a positive left
                 margin.

                     li {
                        margin-left: 1.5em;
                        text-indent: -1.5em;
                        list-style: none;
                     }



Dyson, M.C. (2004) “How physical text layout aﬀects reading from screen”,
   Behaviour and Information Technology, 23(6).
Bababekova, Yuliya (2011) “Font Size and Viewing Distance of Handheld Smart Phones”,
   Optometry & Vision Science, Vol 88, Issue 7.

                 Use outdents in a bibliography to help your reader scan the references by author.



                 Emphasis and other semantics
                 Avoid using using underlines for emphasis
                 As with neutral quotes and two spaces after a full stop, underlining is a relic
                 of the typewriter age. With a typewriter, the single weight, monospaced
                 font and mechanical operation meant typing over with underscores was
                 the only realistic method of highlighting. This is doubly problematic on
                                                                               Meaning and semantics          110




the web because­, conventionally, anything underlined is initially deemed
to be a link. Your readers may therefore be con­fused when they click on
some underlined text and noth­ing happens.

Avoid faux bolds and italics
No type family of professional quality will incorporate bold or italic styles
which are simply computer-generated versions of their normal siblings. A
true bold or italic, as opposed to a synthesised faux bold or italic, will have
been either hand-drawn or at least skilfully modified to optically correct
the distortion and imbalance that results from mathematical fakery. The
following example compares a faux italic with its properly drawn coun-
terpart. The differences are particularly noticeable on curved letters such
as the O.




Clockwise (from top-left): Proxima Nova normal; faux italic; real italic; real italic superimposed on faux.


The Proxima Nova italic illustrated is not strictly a true italic. It should
be described as a sloped roman or oblique. Obliques are slanted, albeit opti-
cally corrected versions of their corresponding roman (the normal upright
font). Italic fonts are significantly different to their roman styles, and are
generally more compact and cursive in nature – they are derived from
handwriting rather than stone carving.




Premiéra and Baskerville italics.
111   Meaning and semantics




      Italic forms are far more common in seriffed typefaces than sans serifs.
      When italics appear in a sans serif family, they tend to be obliques with a
      few subtly different letterforms; in particular, a double-storey a or g in the
      roman may have a single storey in the italic.
          Use the CSS font-style property to select one of three styles: italic,
      oblique and normal. Use normal (the default) to select a face that is nei-
      ther italic nor oblique. Using italic will select a font that is internally
      labelled as an italic face, or, if no italic is available, it will select an oblique
      face if there is one. Similarly, oblique selects a font that is labelled as an
      oblique face, or an italic face if one is available and an oblique is not. In
      both cases, if neither an italic nor an oblique is available, a faux italic will
      be synthesised by the browser by artificially sloping the glyphs of the
      regular face.
          The fallback behaviour of font-style means that italic and oblique
      can usually be used interchangeably. This is particularly true as most fonts
      have their obliques labelled as italic. However, there is a small handful of
      fonts which have both italics and obliques. One such example is Supria
      Sans. In that case, selecting oblique and italic will result in a different
      font being rendered.

          p {
             font-family: "Supria Sans", sans-serif;
             font-style: normal;
          }

          p.italic { font-style: italic; }

          p.oblique { font-style: oblique; }




      Supria Sans normal, oblique and italic.
                                                                        Meaning and semantics   112




Never use faux bolds and italics, even as a means of saving bandwidth.
Explained in more detail in ‘Using web fonts’, you could show a faux bold
first so long as it is replaced by the real thing once it has loaded. The same
can be applied to obliques, but be aware that italics can be problematic in
this approach as they tend to take far less horizontal space, resulting in a
potentially jarring reflow of the page as the italic font loads.
    You can control whether a browser synthesises fonts using the
font-synthesis property. By default its value is weight style meaning
that both bold and oblique/italic fonts are synthesised. To turn all synthe-
sis off, set font-synthesis to none. The following rule will turn off oblique
and italic synthesis in top-level headings, while allowing faux bolds:

    h1 { font-synthesis: style; }

As objectionable as synthesised bolds and italics are, they are a useful fall-
back should the real fonts fail to load or render. If you turn synthesis off
and the italic or bold font does fail to load, your reader will not be able to
see where that styling was being applied and may therefore miss out on
important structure or meaning in the text. You should only turn off syn-
thesis if not having synthesis is vital, or the styling is purely decorational.

Weights
Use the CSS font-weight property to select bold fonts. At its simplest, use
font-weight:bold to select a bold, and font-weight:normal to deselect
it. As with italics and obliques, if no true bold font is available, browsers
will synthesise one, with all its attendant imperfections.


    Premiéra Regular                               Faux bold




    Premiéra Bold superimposed on faux bold        Premiéra Bold


The drawn Premiéra bold is thicker and more balanced than the synthesised faux.
113   Meaning and semantics




      There is much more to font weights than simple regular and bold. Some
      type families will include an entire spectrum of weights from ultra light
      through to extra black, and many more will have multiple fonts at key inter-
      vals along that spectrum. You select a specific weight using font-weight’s
      numeric scale which has nine values running from 100 to 900 in steps of
      100. By definition, regular weights are 400 on this scale, and bold weights
      are 700. Other than those definitions, the scale is somewhat arbitrary. The
      100 to 900 values roughly correspond to common weight names, but these
      are approximations since font weights are rarely numbered and don’t fit
      into precise pigeonholes.

                 Weight       Common names

                 100          ultra light, extra light, thin, hairline


                 200          light


                 300          book


                 400          regular, normal


                 500          medium


                 600          semibold, demibold


                 700          bold


                 800          extra bold, black


                 900          ultra bold, heavy, poster



      One designer’s medium is another designer’s semibold (and that’s just
      for de facto font names in English). Unless you are specifically setting
      font-weight in a @font-face rule, you may need to experiment with the
      number scale to select your intended font.
                                                                 Meaning and semantics    114




It’s very rare for a font family to contain nine different weights. If you
specify a weight for which no font exists, the nearest weight is used. Bold
weights (600 upwards) will map to the next heaviest font. Light weights
(500 downwards) will select the next lightest font. Synthesis of weights in
browsers is limited to making a bold from a lighter weight. Browsers do
not increase the weight further or try to lighten the font.




       100        200          300         400          500    600         700           800    900


Weight mappings for a family with 300, 700 and 900 weights.


The numeric weight system, which has existed in the CSS specification since
it was first published in 1996, was intended to support a dynamic stylistic
range from the get-go1.

    “It makes sense to recognize integers between 100 and 900. One of the reasons
     we chose to use three-digit numbers was to support intermediate values in
     the future.”
                                             — Håkon Wium Lie, co-inventor of CSS


Integers are likely to be introduced in CSS Fonts Level 4 with the advent
of variable fonts (see ‘Using web fonts’), but as of CSS3 only intervals of
100 are allowed. If you use any other number, browsers will not round to
the nearest hundred; instead, they will treat the style rule as invalid and
ignore it. This is the correct behaviour, but will make any future use of
a more fine-grained scale problematic until browser support catches up.

Make links clear but unobtrusive
Hyperlinks – actionable connections joining one online resource to another
– are unique to digital media. Clickable links put the ‘web’ into World Wide
 Web, and are fundamental to its adoption, growth and incorporation into
 modern society.



1    Reaffirmed by Håkon Wium Lie in a post to the CSS Working Group
     (http://wbtyp.net/145), January 2015.
115   Meaning and semantics




      The perfect link should be visible but unobtrusive, allowing people to
      realise what’s clickable, but without drawing too much attention to itself.
      Often, context is enough to indicate the presence of a link: site navigation,
      lists of further reading, search results should all be self-evident. Inline
      links – hyperlinked words and phrases within running text – are more
      problematic. Inline links pose a compromise between allowing your reader
      to flow through the text with minimal distraction, while still making it
      clear that a link is present. The default treatment of links – bright blue
      underlined text – draws way too much attention. The links pop out like
      molehills on an ornamental lawn.



          In the embellishment or decoration of a message, there lies the
          opportunity for the little added touch that goes far beyond the bare
          essentials of taste and into the realm of fantasy. For this reason
          the ornamentation of printing is at once the most charming and
          the most dangerous diversion the typographer can ﬁnd: dangerous
          because all matters of decoration call upon the utmost discretion
          and sense of ﬁtness for their eﬀective use.

      The default styling of links causes undue distraction.


      Removing the underlining and reducing the colour intensity of the links
      would be two ways to lessen the distracting nature of the default styling.
      The downsides of this approach are that underlining links on the web is
      a well-recognised convention, and, just as importantly, the underlining
      helps colour-blind readers and those using monochrome displays to pick
      out the links. The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 (http://wbtyp.
      net/83) (WCAG2) specify that you can rely on colour alone to indicate links
      provided you are ‘using a contrast ratio of 3:1 with surrounding text and
      providing additional visual cues on focus’. (There are online tools (http://
      wbtyp.net/85) available for measuring colour contrast.) But in essence, if
      you remove the underline from links and wish them to remain accessible,
      you will need to render your inline links in a highly distinctive colour, or
      provide an alternative visual cue.
         Links are not just the preserve of the web. Directions to other resources
      have long been provided in printed matter; techniques used include foot-
      notes indicated with a superscript, a fist    pointing to the resource, or a
      simple arrow →. You could also use a background colour to highlight the
      link, or any combination thereof.
                                                                        Meaning and semantics   116




    In the embellishment° or decoration of a message, there lies the
    opportunity° for the little added touch that goes far beyond the bare
    essentials of taste and into the realm of fantasy°. For this reason
    the ornamentation° of printing is at once the most charming and
    the most dangerous diversion the typographer can ﬁnd: dangerous
    because all matters of decoration° call upon the utmost discretion
    and sense of ﬁtness° for their eﬀective use.

Links appended with ° and background colours on hover in the style of Matthew Butterick.


Underlining remains the web’s idiomatic way to indicate a link and for
that reason it should always be your first consideration. Like any mark
which has the potential to detract from the reading experience, handle
underlines with great care. The ideal underline should be positioned at
just the right distance from the text, sitting comfortably behind it when
descenders want to occupy the same space. It should be as thick or thin as
the serifs, or as thick as the thinnest part of sans serif type.




Subtle underlining avoiding descenders.


To set the best possible underline, we would need to be able to:

•   adjust the thickness of the line
•   change the distance of the line from the text
•   change the colour
•   skip descenders
•   separately style hovered, focused and visited links
•   have the underlining wrap with the text

The standard way to toggle an underline is with the text-decoration
property. To remove underlines from links except when they are hovered
over or have focus:
117   Meaning and semantics




         a {
            text-decoration: none;
         }

         a:focus, a:hover {
            text-decoration: underline;
         }

      Using text-decoration alone affords us no control. Browsers implement
      underlines in many subtle – and not so subtle – differing ways: they posi-
      tion the underline in different places; they usually use the same colour as
      the link text, but not always; some increase the thickness of the underline
      as the font size increases, some set the thickness according to screen res-
      olution, others always stick to 1 px. In all cases, the presentation of the
      underline is rarely good enough.
          The text-decoration property has been hugely expanded in CSS3 and
      provides us with some of the control we need:

      • text-decoration-color changes the colour
      • text-decoration-skip skips descenders and other content
      • text-decoration-style selects solid, dotted or wavy lines

      However, the thickness and position are still controlled by the browser,
      and (at the time of writing) support for CSS3 text decorating is patchy at
      best. To wrest full control of underlines, therefore, requires some hacks
      and workarounds. Turning off the text decoration and applying a bottom
      border instead can often work well:

         a {
            text-decoration: none;
            border-bottom: 1px solid #ccc;
         }

         @supports (text-decoration-skip: ink) {
            a {
         		text-decoration: underline 1px solid #ccc;
         		text-decoration-skip: ink;
         		border-bottom: 0;
            }
         }
                                                               Meaning and semantics   118




The downside of this approach is that you still don’t have control over
the positioning. This can be a problem: depending on the font metrics
and your line spacing, the border can sometimes be placed too low. A fur-
ther workaround is to use a background-image gradient for the underline
and a white text shadow to clear the descenders, both of which can affect
browsing performance on slow devices. See experiments by Gary Hepting 2
and an explanation by Marcin Wichary of Medium’s underlines3 for more
details on these clever hacks.




2   Gary Hepting’s experiments (http://wbtyp.net/18) on Codepen.
3   ‘Crafting link underlines on Medium’ (http://wbtyp.net/36) by Marcin Wichary in
    Designing Medium (2014).
119   Numerals and tables




      Numerals
      and tables

      Take just as much care over numerical and tabular content as
      you would do over text. Use the correct form of numeral for the
      situation, and design tables to be read, not just looked at.

      Use old-style numerals in running text
      In ‘Ligatures and abbreviations’ we established that writing systems based
      on the Latin alphabet, in addition to Greek and Cyrillic, use a bicameral
      script, with each letter represented by two different forms – uppercase and
      lower (or majuscule and minuscule, to use more formal terms). The same is
      true of numerals. We have at our disposal ‘uppercase’ numbers 0123456789
      called lining or titling numerals, and ‘lowercase’ numerals 0123456789 called
      old-style or text numerals.
          Unlike capital and lowercase letters, different forms of numbers do not
      convey different meanings; they are, however, an essential component of
      the typographer’s palette. Just as a string of capital letters in the middle
      of a sentence SHOUTS at your reader, so numbers set in lining numerals
      call undue attention to themselves. Are pounds, dollars, dates and quotas
      really more important than the words and ideas which give them context
      and meaning?
          Treat numbers as you would letters, making sure they don’t stand out
      unnecessarily. Do this by using old-style numerals in all your running text.
      Most modern, professional fonts will include both old-style and lining
      numerals as OpenType features. One or other of these styles will be used
      for the default numbers. More often it will be the old-style numerals, but
      there is no strict rule or consistency, and the choice of default is down to
      the type designer.
          It’s also the case that the vast majority of fonts are neither modern nor
      professional, if modern means OpenType-enabled and professional means
      designed with both sets of numerals. Take Georgia, for example. Designed
                                                                         Numerals and tables   120




by Matthew Carter in 1993 as a screen font for Microsoft, it is extremely
well put together, elegant and appealing, and one of the most popular and
widely distributed fonts in the world. But it is not packaged as an Open-
Type font and so only contains one set of numbers, in this case old-style
numerals. Times New Roman, which is similarly widespread but, again,
not as an OpenType font, is packaged only with lining numerals. Georgia
and Times New Roman are so widely distributed because they are bundled
free of charge with Windows and Mac operating systems. However, both
these fonts – like many others – are available to buy in professional versions,
which do come as OpenType fonts complete with both sets of numerals,
small caps and many other features.




Top: Numerals in Times New Roman Pro. Bottom: Numerals in Georgia Pro.


To specify old-style numerals, set the font-variant-numeric property
with a value of oldstyle-nums. If most of what you’re designing on a page
is running text, then your best approach is to set old-style numerals so that
they are inherited from the <body>.

    body { font-variant-numeric: oldstyle-nums; }

For legacy browsers requiring font-feature-settings, use the onum
OpenType feature tag. As explained in ‘Ligatures and abbreviations’, you
can add an @supports rule to cater for legacy browsers that only support
font-feature-settings:

    body { font-feature-settings: "onum" 1; }

   @supports (font-variant-numeric: oldstyle-nums) {
      body {
   		font-feature-settings: normal;
   		font-variant-numeric: oldstyle-nums;
      }
   }
121   Numerals and tables




      Many sans serif fonts of the early to mid-twentieth century, including
      Helvetica, were never designed with anything other than lining numerals.
      This is one of the reasons why Helvetica is rarely your best choice for body
      text. That said, the lining numerals are less of a problem in Helvetica than
      they are in some other typefaces.
         As we saw in ‘Designing paragraphs: line spacing’, Helvetica has a large
      x-height. A consequence of this is that its lowercase letters are closer in
      stature to its lining numerals when compared to other sans serif fonts
      such as Futura and Avenir, which have far smaller x-heights.




      Compared with old-style numerals, lining numerals shout loudly in Avenir.


      Clearly Paul Renner and Adrian Frutiger, the designers of Futura and
      Avenir respectively, recognised the need for old-style numerals in their
      fonts as both these typefaces were designed with them from the start.
      Sadly, the versions of Futura and Avenir widely distributed with Apple
      devices have lining numerals as the default, and do not include old-style
      numerals as OpenType features (the macOS version of Avenir Next, how-
      ever, does include them).

      Use lining numerals in headings
      Old-style numerals are your go-to glyphs for making numbers sit well in
      running text. For the same reason they are at ease with lowercase letters,
      so old-style numerals feel uncomfortable in close proximity to capital let-
      ters. If you set headings in anything other than sentence case, in particular
      ALL CAPS, or Title Case, then don’t use old-style numerals. Lining numer-
      als will sit far more naturally in the company of uppercase letterforms.
                                                                          Numerals and tables   122




    1912 Ditchling Sussex                                           1912 Ditchling Sussex
    Edward Johnston moves to the village,                           Edward Johnston moves to the village,
    where Eric Gill already lived and an                            where Eric Gill already lived and an
    artistic community was forming.                                 artistic community was forming.



    1912 DITCHLING SUSSEX                                           1912 DITCHLING SUSSEX
    Edward Johnston moves to the village,                           Edward Johnston moves to the village,
    where Eric Gill already lived and an                            where Eric Gill already lived and an
    artistic community was forming.                                 artistic community was forming.


Lining numerals sit more naturally in headings than old-style numerals.


On those occasions when numbers are the star attraction, lining numer-
als are the way to give them the attention they crave. Old-style numer-
als have a wavy rhythm to them, with some numbers reaching upwards
towards the capitals, some squatting at the x-height, and others duck-
ing down below the baseline: 1234567890. This is why they work so well
in continuous reading – they replicate the patterns of words in running
text. However, if your reader is scanning a sequence of numbers, look-
ing for patterns, making comparisons, or hunting for data in a list, table
or other setting, they will find it far easier to do so with the familiar-
ity and evenness of lining numerals. To specify lining numerals, set the
font-variant-numeric property with a value of lining-nums:

    h1 { font-variant-numeric: lining-nums; }

For legacy browsers requiring font-feature-settings, use the lnum
OpenType feature tag.


Use proper subscripts and superscripts
Subscripts and superscripts are tiny numerals which are lowered or raised.
They are used in chemical and mathematical formulas, as footnote indica-
tors, and other specialist situations. For example: ‘Caffeine1 is C₈H₁₀N₄O₂.’
Mark this up meaningfully in HTML using the <sup> and <sub> elements:

    Caffeine<sup>1</sup> is C<sup>8</sup>H<sup>10</sup>N
       <sup>4</sup>O<sup>2</sup>.
          123   Numerals and tables




                Browsers’ default styling for <sup> and <sub> is to take a regular numeral,
                make it a bit smaller, and raise or lower it accordingly:




                   Caﬀeine1 is C8H10N4O2
                This works fine up to a point, but the numerals are still a little too big aesthet-
                ically and they affect the line spacing, causing unevenness in the rhythm:



Caﬀeine is a central nervous system stimulant of the methylxanthine class.
Its chemical formula is C8H10N4O2. It is a bitter, white crystalline purine,
a methylxanthine alkaloid, and is chemically related to the adenine and…


                Most professional fonts contain properly designed subscripts and super-
                scripts built in as OpenType features. These numerals are smaller and
                squatter than regular numbers, and because their position relative to other
                characters is part of their design, the line spacing is unaffected:




                   Caﬀeine1 is C₈H₁₀N₄O₂
                To use proper subscripts and superscripts, use the font-variant-position
                property, like this:

                   sub { font-variant-position: sub; }
                   sup { font-variant-position: super; }

                Unfortunately, this still leaves us with a problem: the browser’s default styl-
                ing is still applied. Our special subscript character is being made smaller
                and it’s getting moved downwards, affecting the line spacing:
                                                                              Numerals and tables   124




     Caﬀeine is a central nervous system stimulant of the methylxanthine class.
     Its chemical formula is C8H10N4O2. It is a bitter, white crystalline purine,
     a methylxanthine alkaloid, and is chemically related to the adenine and…


     Caﬀeine is a central nervous system stimulant of the methylxanthine class.
     Its chemical formula is C8H10N4O2. It is a bitter, white crystalline purine,
     a methylxanthine alkaloid, and is chemically related to the adenine and…


     Caﬀeine is a central nervous system stimulant of the methylxanthine class.
     Its chemical formula is C₈H₁₀N₄O₂. It is a bitter, white crystalline purine,
     a methylxanthine alkaloid, and is chemically related to the adenine and…
Top: Default <sub> styling. Middle: Proper subscripts with browser default styling.
Bottom: Proper subscripts only.


The styles the browser applies to our subscript characters are these:

    vertical-align: sub; font-size: smaller;

We need to remove those styles to get the desired effect, so our rule now
becomes:

    sub { vertical-align: inherit;
          font-size: inherit;
          font-variant-position: sub; }

That will work fine for browsers that support OpenType. But browsers
that don’t will get C8H10N4O2, a degraded rendering compared with the
browser defaults. To address this we can use an @supports rule to check
if the browser supports font-variant-position and only override the
browser’s default <sub> styling if that’s the case:

    sub { font-variant-position: sub; }

    @supports (font-variant-position: sub) {
       sub { vertical-align: inherit;
             font-size: inherit; }
    }
125   Numerals and tables




      For legacy browsers requiring font-feature-settings, use the sups
      OpenType feature tag for superscripts, and subs for subscripts. If we factor
      these in, we get comprehensive, backwards-compatible style rules, but
      where two simple properties should have done the job, we now have a far
      more verbose proposition:

      Subscripts

         sub { font-feature-settings: "subs" 1; }

         @supports (font-variant-position: sub) {
            sub { font-feature-settings: normal;
                  font-variant-position: sub; }
         }
         @supports ((font-variant-position: sub) or (font-feature-
         settings: "subs" 1)) {
            sub { vertical-align: inherit;
                  font-size: inherit; }
         }

      Superscripts

         sup { font-feature-settings: "sups" 1; }

         @supports (font-variant-position: super) {
            sup { font-feature-settings: normal;
                  font-variant-position: super; }
         }
         @supports ((font-variant-position: super) or (font-
         feature-settings: "sups" 1)) {
            sup { vertical-align: inherit;
                  font-size: inherit; }
         }

      Reference notes with superscripts
      One particular use of superscripts is for footnotes. When you reference
      notes using numbers, use true superscripts in the text but full-size num-
      bers in the notes themselves.
                                                                                  Numerals and tables   126




Show footnotes in context
While we’re on the subject of footnotes, it’s worth making a brief diversion
into how the web improves their usability compared with the limitations
of paper.
    Many forms of writing, including academic papers, historical novels,
detailed journalism and non-fiction books such as this one, contain addi-
tional citations, explanations and thoughts referred to within the text
itself. A symbol is used to connect the note to the relevant location in the
text. The symbols employed as references to annotations are either super-
scripted numbers or an esoteric series of devices starting with asterisks*
and processing through daggers† to double daggers‡ and beyond.
    Since the advent of mass printing in the Victorian era, the notes them-
selves have typically been positioned either at the bottom of the referring
printed page (footnotes), or at the end of a chapter or the entire work (end-
notes). However, this approach means the notes are located away from their
position within the body of text. This can disturb the reader who wishes
to refer to the annotation as they proceed through the text. The connected
point in the text may well be halfway through a sentence in the middle of
a paragraph at some point higher up the page, or on a different preceding
page altogether, and attempting to return to it disrupts the reader’s rhythm.
   An earlier approach by medieval scribes and Renaissance printers placed
notes in the margins (side notes) rather than at the bottom of the page. By
including notes as marginalia, the annotations are present where needed
and can be read with little more than a glance away from the main text.




A side note in a 9th-century manuscript. Source: Einsiedeln, Stiftsbibliothek, Codex 172(1128), p.20.


Although side notes are an improvement on footnotes, both solutions are
designed within the confines of the two-dimensional printed page. The
web is an interactive medium and provides us with at least three dimen-
sions in which to work, implying you can use the z-axis to place the note
on top of the main text.
127   Numerals and tables




      Enable your reader to reveal the note on demand in the very place they
      are reading. Put simply, link to the footnote using a conventional symbol,
      but have it pop up in the vicinity of the link, thus providing a thoroughly
      modern solution impossible within the limitations of a printed page.




      Clicking a superscript could pop up a footnote in situ.



      Set tables as text to be read
      Tables come in many forms. Some contain simple numbers, others are com-
      plex with mixtures of numeric data and textual information. Some require
      reading row by row, others are scanned vertically. The potential use for
      tables is as varied as the written word. They can be financial statements,
      bus timetables, multilanguage dictionaries, tables of contents, numerical
      conversions, pricing options, feature comparisons, technical specifications,
      and so on.
         Despite the huge variation in table size, complexity, contents and pur-
      pose, every table shares two simple design principles: they should be reada-
      ble and support a sense of the data held within. They should not be prettied
      up to satisfy a sense of aesthetic when simply looked at. That said, a well-
      designed table can still be a thing of beauty but with the form following
      the function. Tables are not pictures of data: they are catalogues of data
      to be perused, parsed, referenced and interrogated. A well-designed table
      will enable the information to be read and understood, and will reveal the
      patterns and correlations inherent in the data. As Jan Tschichold, the vir-
      tuoso of typography design, put it in Asymmetric Typography 1:

          Tabular matter need no longer be a rather unpleasant job to design: on the
          contrary, it can become a really charming and artistic exercise, in no way
          less interesting than any other area.

      1   Asymmetric Typography by Jan Tschichold (1967, after 1935 original).
                                                              Numerals and tables   128




Wherever possible plan the readability of every table in advance. Your
design process should be an investigation into making the data undemand-
ing to read, simple to follow and easy to extract.
    Just as you wouldn’t design body text with the aim of fitting as many
words as possible on the screen, so you shouldn’t treat designing a table
as an exercise in cramming as much data as possible into one space. You
might be tempted to reduce the text size of your table – and if the data is
entirely numeric you might be able to get away with it. Your reader should
still be able to be comfortably read and interpret the table from their normal
position, without needing to lean in.

Don’t stretch tables
Many designers will instinctively apply a width to their tables – just as
they might an image – stretching them to fill the text column or page.
And that is the appeal of setting tables full-width: you can make them
look somewhat image-like when viewed from afar. However, while a table
spread across the screen might look preferable from a distance, on closer
inspection it will be harder to read as the data will be unnecessarily sep-
arated. To add insult to injury, tables set full-width are often replete with
background colours and borders to give the table further the texture of an
image, when what your reader really requires is the texture of text. For the
sake of your readers, avoid these temptations.
   You might consider making all the columns an even width. This too
does nothing for the readability of the contents. Some table cells will be
too wide, leaving the data lost and detached from its neighbours. Other
table cells will be too narrow, cramping the data uncomfortably. Table
columns should be sized according to the data they contain. Columns of
small numbers should be narrow, and columns of paragraphs should be
relatively wide. This sounds like a lot of effort, and for a print designer it
would be, as they would have to size each column manually in their layout
software. Fortunately, web browsers are very clever when it comes to laying
out tables and will do all that hard work for you. Browsers have been laying
out tables automatically according to complex algorithms since long before
CSS came along – just let them do their thing.

Keep table furniture and fills to a minimum
The statistician and information designer Edward Tufte introduced the con-
cept of data-ink in his 1983 classic, The Visual Display of Quantitative Informa-
tion. He defines data-ink as ‘the non-erasable core of the graphic’, whereas
non-data-ink is the ink used in the graphic, not to directly represent data
129   Numerals and tables




      but for scales, labels, fills and edges. Tufte goes on to define the data-ink
      ratio as the proportion of ink that is used to present actual data compared
      to the total amount of ink used in the entire graphic. The goal is to design
      a graphic with the highest possible data-ink ratio (tending towards 1.0)
      without eliminating what is necessary for effective communication.
          Where Tufte talks about graphics he includes charts, diagrams and tables,
      and where he uses ‘ink’ we can think of pixels. In terms of tables, he’s saying
      that we should remove almost everything in the design which is not data
      or white space. Minimise furniture, maximise information. This is an ideal
      first principle to bear in mind when considering the typographic design of
      a table.
          As a starting point, avoid any border or frame surrounding the table.
      This is a Victorian embellishment which is entirely unnecessary as text
      alignment will shape the table just fine.
          Try to achieve a readable table using just alignment, spacing and group-
      ing. Avoid zebra striping, tints and fills, and any other backgrounds. These
      can be superficially pretty but are usually a distraction. They serve to dis-
      tort the meaning of the data by highlighting every other row to the detri-
      ment of neighbouring rows. Only use tints as a subtle means of guiding
      your reader’s eyes, and then only if you cannot arrange the data to that
      end. If you choose to tint, do so only in the primary direction of reading:
      down if lists, across otherwise.
          When it comes to lines and borders between rows and columns – typo-
      graphically referred to as rules – the same applies: use them judiciously
      and preferably not at all. In Asymmetric Typography Jan Tschichold sums
      this up wonderfully:

         Tables should not be set to look like nets with every number enclosed.
         Try to do without rules altogether. They should be used only when
         they are absolutely necessary. Vertical rules are needed only when the
         space between columns is so narrow that mistakes will occur in reading
         without rules. Tables without vertical rules look better. Thin rules are
         better than thick ones.

      Avoid using row or column borders unless the data alignment, spacing and
      grouping are not sufficient to guide your reader’s eye. If you do need to use
      rules for this purpose, use them in one direction only and employ a lighter
      colour to reduce the impact of the lines: you are making a distinction, not
      constructing a barricade.
                                                              Numerals and tables   130




Left-align text, right-align numbers, and align headings
with data
In the spirit of treating tables as artefacts to be read, don’t centre-align text
within tables. Align table text as you would anywhere else; that is, aligned
left. As text in tables tends to end up in narrow columns, don’t justify the
text either – leave it ragged-right – or you will end up with rivers flow-
ing down the tables, potentially causing confusion and certainly harming
readability. You can hyphenate, however, particularly if the table columns
would otherwise have a pronounced rag.
    Right-align numbers to help your reader make easier comparisons of
magnitude when scanning down columns. To aid scanning in this manner
you will need consistent precision of your numeric data; that is, use the
same number of decimal places.
    For consistency and ease of understanding, match the alignment of head-
ings to the alignment of the data. Right-align headings of numeric data and
left-align headings of columns with text, for example:


  Country                Area       Population         GDP      Capital
  Austria              83,858        8,169,929          339     Vienna
  Belgium              30,528       11,007,000          410     Brussels
  Denmark              43,094        5,564,219          271     Copenhagen
  France             547,030        66,104,000        2,181     Paris
  Germany            357,021        80,716,000        3,032     Berlin
  Greece             131,957        11,123,034          176     Athens
  Ireland              70,280        4,234,925          255     Dublin
  Italy              301,230        60,655,464        1,642     Rome
  Luxembourg            2,586          448,569           51     Luxembourg
  Netherlands          41,526       16,902,103          676     Amsterdam
  Portugal             91,568       10,409,995          179     Lisbon
  Spain              504,851        47,059,533        1,075     Madrid
  Sweden             449,964         9,090,113          447     Stockholm
  UK                 244,820        65,110,000        2,727     London
131   Numerals and tables




      Align to the decimal point
      You may find yourself not having control of numerical precision, or per-
      haps the data you’re working with is rounded to the same significant number
      rather than adhering to the same precision. In this case, simply right-align-
      ing a column of numbers will not help your reader scan down the column:
      small, high-precision numbers will look at first glance like a large number.
      Instead, align numbers to the decimal point. This will enable your reader
      to more readily compare magnitudes among a wider variety of data:

          +-------------+
          | Call charge |
          +-------------+
          |     $1.30   |
          |     $2.50   |
          |    $10.80   |
          |   $111.01   |
          |    $85      |
          |    N/A      |
          |      $.05   |
          |      $.06   |
          +-------------+

      Aligning to the decimal point was theoretically possible by using the HTML4
      char attribute on a <td> tag, but in reality it was never supported. The
      modern way to align numbers to a decimal point (or to any character, in
      fact) is through a new value of the text-align property, although at the
      time of writing this is languishing in the CSS Text Level 4 Module2 and
      support is patchy at best.
         The syntax of the new value is simple. You include the alignment char-
      acter (usually a full stop or comma) in quotes, followed by a space and your
      desired alignment keyword, which defaults to right if you omit it. For
      example, the following will centre the data and align to a decimal point as
      in our prior example:

          td { text-align: "." center; }

      By specifying different alignment characters you can lay out more com-
      plex tables in a useful way; in this example, aligning digits to ‘×’ and ‘:’.


      2   Character-based Alignment in a Table Column (http://wbtyp.net/103) in the CSS
          Text Module Level 4.
                                                                Numerals and tables   132




  Video standard        Resolution              Pixels      Aspect ratio
  QQVGA                 160 × 120                     19k       4:3
  HQVGA                 240 × 160                     38k       3:2
  QVGA                  320 × 240                     76k       4:3
  WQVGA                 480 × 272                130k          16:9
  VGA                   640 × 480                307k           4:3
  SVGA                  800 × 600                480k           4:3
  XGA                  1024 × 768                786k           4:3
  HD                   1260 × 768                967k          16:9
  WXGA                 1280 × 800              1,024k          16:10
  SXGA                 1280 × 1024             1,310k           5:4
  UXGA                 1600 × 1200             1,920k           4:3
  FHD                  1920 × 1080             2,073k          16:9
  DCI 2K               2048 × 1080             2,211k          19:10
  WQXGA                2560 × 1600             4,096k          16:10
  4K UHD               3840 × 2160             8,294k          16:9
  8K UHD               7680 × 4320           33,177k           16:9

                         Selected display standards



Use tabular lining numerals in tables of numbers
Many tables, such as financial statements or timetables, are made up mostly
of numbers. Generally speaking, their purpose is to provide the reader with
numeric data, presented in either columns or rows, and sometimes in a
matrix of the two. Your reader may use the table by scanning down the col-
umns, either searching for a data point or by making comparisons between
numbers. Your reader may also make sense of the data by simply glancing
at the column or row. It is far easier to compare numbers if the ones, tens
and hundreds are all lined up vertically; that is, all the digits should occupy
exactly the same width.
    Digits of the same width can inherently be found in monospaced fonts,
and there is nothing wrong with choosing a suitable monospaced font to
present a table of data (see ‘Combining typefaces’). However, many propor-
tionally spaced fonts (those where a 1 is narrower than an 8, and a W is wider
than an I) also come with additional sets of figures which are monospaced.
133   Numerals and tables




      These are called tabular numerals. As well as being of equal width, tabular
      numerals will be subtly designed differently from the standard proportional
      numerals. For example, a 1 will normally have a bar for its base, and a 0
      (zero) may be designed slightly narrower to better fit the chosen number
      width. Tabular numerals are usually available in old-style and lining var-
      iations. Use tabular lining numerals to provide your reader with the most
      effective way to reference vertically and horizontally in tables of data.


                                 Lining    Old-style
         Proportional          409,280      409,280
                                367,112      367,112
                               155,068      155,068
                                171,792      171,792
                Tabular        409,280      409,280
                               367,112      367,112
                               155,068      155,068
                               171,792      171,792

      Different numeral styles compared.


      To specify tabular lining numerals, set the font-variant-numeric prop-
      erty with a value of lining-nums and tabular-nums:

          table { font-variant-numeric: lining-nums tabular-nums; }

      The equivalent properties for legacy browsers requiring font-feature-
      settings, use the lnum and tnum OpenType feature tags.

      Proportional numerals
      If you need to specify proportional numerals, set the font-variant-
      numeric property with a value of proportional-nums. For legacy browsers
      requiring font-feature-settings, use the pnum OpenType feature tag.

      Put white space to work to group and separate
      Having eliminated rules and fills (borders and backgrounds) from your
      table, you will need to apply white space to your table so your reader can
      make sense of it. It is at this point that you should remove from your mind’s
      eye all visions of spreadsheets and other such uniform grids, and think
      instead in terms of typography and simple gestalt grouping principles.
                                                             Numerals and tables   134




You will primarily need to separate the data so that each element can be
individually identified and read as separate from the others. To have more
control over the spacing, first collapse the spacing between borders:

   table { border-collapse: collapse; }

In traditional HTML tables, adjacent cells each have their own distinct bor-
ders which are separated from each other, with the separation still present
even if the borders are not. In the collapsed border model, adjacent table
cells share borders. As we are removing (almost) all cell borders, and any
we retain will be single key lines, the collapsed border model is the most
appropriate.
    Now apply padding to the table cells to separate the data. You’ll find that
adding a smaller amount of padding to the top of the cell is a useful way
to provide a visually balanced separation from the rows above and below.
To ensure everything lines up nicely, apply the same padding to heading
cells as to data cells. Because line lengths are often very short in tables, you
can reduce the line height right down. In the following example, we’ve
removed all additional line spacing, but you may need more depending on
your choice of font and the amount of text in the table cells.

   td, th {
      padding: 0.125em 0.5em 0.25em 0.5em;
      line-height: 1;
   }

The gestalt grouping principles most useful in tables are those of proximity
and similarity. Move related data closer together to be distinct from other
data; in other words, space apart groups of rows or columns. A by-product
of grouping rows is that the data becomes much easier to scan and refer to
than if the table consisted of a succession of undifferentiated rows. Ensure
data of a similar content or meaning look similar at a glance, which you
can do through alignment, colour and font style.

Table captions
We will attend to the typographic specifics of table captions in ‘Choos-
ing typefaces for functional text’ but it’s worth noting now how to mark
up captions for tables. If you are choosing to place your table inside a
<figure> element, which is a perfectly reasonable thing to do, then use a
<figcaption> element before or after the table. If your table is not inside
135   Numerals and tables




      a <figure> element, or you have multiple items in the figure, use the aptly
      named <caption> element, which HTML provides specifically for tables.
      Always write the <caption> tag immediately after the opening <table>
      tag and before any table data, like this:

         <table>
            <caption>
            Imperial to metric conversion factors
            <p><i>Values are given to three significant figures</i></p>
            </caption>
            <thead> … </thead>
            <tbody> … </tbody>
         </table>

      You can position the caption either above or below the table using the
      caption-side property and a corresponding value of either top or bottom.

         caption { caption-side: bottom; }

      The following table shows a caption and demonstrates gestalt grouping
      principles by separating the data into related rows:


                      To convert                       into                              multiply by

        Length        inches                           millimetres (mm)                       25.4
                      feet                             centimetres (cm)                      30.48
                      yards                            metres (m)                            0.914
                      miles                            kilometres (km)                        1.61

        Area          square inches                    sq. millimetres (mm²)                   645
                      square feet                      square metres (m²)                    0.093
                      square yards                     square metres (m²)                    0.836
                      acres                            hectares                               2.47

        Volume        cubic inches                     millitres (ml)                         16.4
                      cubic feet                       litres                                 28.3
                      imperial gallons                 litres                                 4.55
                      US barrels                       cubic metres (m³)                     0.159

                                    Imperial to metric conversion factors
                            Values are given to three significant figures unless exact
                                                                                        Numerals and tables       136




     Note that in this example, the numbers do not align to the decimal point.
     This is because the purpose of the table is for the reader to easily identify
     and extract a multiplication factor. In this instance there is no obvious use
     case for comparing the relative magnitudes of the factors, which is when
     decimal alignment would be useful.

     Do not over-stylise tables
     The French writer-aviator Antoine de Saint-Exupéry wrote3 ‘perfection is
     attained not when there is nothing more to add, but when there is no longer
     anything to take away.’ Quoting de Saint-Exupéry may have become a cliché,
     but his idiom is entirely apt when applied to table design.
         There is no need to make a table look like a spreadsheet. A spreadsheet
     is a tool unto itself; a table is for presenting data and information that can
     be read. Spreadsheet software offers a multitude of options for table styles,
     which add text formatting, borders, background fills and all manner of
     ornament. They may make pretty pictures but do nothing for table reada-
     bility, so do not try to emulate them. Tables can be beautiful but they are
     not works of art. Instead of painting and decorating them, design tables
     for your reader.

   Director                   Film                 Released                Budget                     Gross             Rating
   John Ford              The Informer             May 1935                $243,000                 $950,000            8.3/10
                      The Grapes of Wrath          Jan 1940                $800,000                 $2,500,000           9/10
                    How Green Was My Valley        Oct 1941                $800,000                 $2,800,000          7.9/10
                         The Quiet Man              Jul 1952              $1,750,000                $3,200,000           8/10
 William Wyler            Mrs. Miniver             Jun 1942               $1,340,000                $8,878,000          7.8/10
                   The Best Years of Our Lives     Nov 1946               $2,100,000               $23,700,000          8.6/10
                            Ben-Hur                Nov 1959               $15,200,000              $146,900,000         7.9/10
  Frank Capra        It Happened One Night         Feb 1934                $325,000                 $2,500,000          8.9/10
                     Mr. Deeds Goes to Town        Apr 1936                $845,710                 $1,000,000          8.4/10
                    You Can’t Take It With You     Aug 1938               $1,644,736                $5,295,526          7.6/10
  Billy Wilder         The Lost Weekend            Nov 1945               $1,250,000               $11,000,000          8.2/10
                         The Apartment             Jun 1960               $3,000,000               $24,600,000          8.5/10
  David Lean       The Bridge on the River Kwai    Oct 1957               $2,800,000               $30,600,000          9.2/10
                       Lawrence of Arabia          Dec 1962               $15,000,000              $70,000,000           9/10
Steven Spielberg         Schindler’s List          Nov 1993              $22,000,000               $321,200,000          9/10
                       Saving Private Ryan          Jul 1998             $70,000,000               $481,800,000         8.6/10
Fred Zinnemann        From Here to Eternity        Aug 1953               $2,500,000               $30,500,000          8.2/10
                      A Man for All Seasons        Dec 1966               $2,000,000               $28,400,000          7.8/10

     A typical spreadsheet-styled table set full-width with borders, fills and centre-alignment.




     3    Terre des Hommes (translated into English as Wind, Sand and Stars) by Antoine de
          Saint-Exupéry (1939).
    137    Numerals and tables




   Director                  Film            Released Budget          Gross     Rating
   John Ford             The Informer        May 1935 $243,000       $950,000 8.3/10
                     The Grapes of Wrath     Jan 1940 $800,000 $2,500,000 9/10
                 How Green Was My Valley Oct 1941 $800,000 $2,800,000 7.9/10
                        The Quiet Man         Jul 1952 $1,750,000 $3,200,000 8/10
 William Wyler           Mrs. Miniver        Jun 1942 $1,340,000 $8,878,000 7.8/10
                 The Best Years of Our Lives Nov 1946 $2,100,000 $23,700,000 8.6/10
                           Ben-Hur           Nov 1959 $15,200,000 $146,900,000 7.9/10
  Frank Capra      It Happened One Night     Feb 1934 $325,000 $2,500,000 8.9/10
                  Mr. Deeds Goes to Town Apr 1936 $845,710 $1,000,000 8.4/10
                 You Can’t Take It With You Aug 1938 $1,644,736 $5,295,526 7.6/10
  Billy Wilder        The Lost Weekend       Nov 1945 $1,250,000 $11,000,000 8.2/10
                        The Apartment        Jun 1960 $3,000,000 $24,600,000 8.5/10
   David Lean The Bridge on the River Kwai Oct 1957 $2,800,000 $30,600,000 9.2/10
                      Lawrence of Arabia     Dec 1962 $15,000,000 $70,000,000 9/10
Steven Spielberg        Schindler’s List     Nov 1993 $22,000,000 $321,200,000 9/10
                     Saving Private Ryan      Jul 1998 $70,000,000 $481,800,000 8.6/10
Fred Zinnemann      From Here to Eternity    Aug 1953 $2,500,000 $30,500,000 8.2/10
                    A Man for All Seasons    Dec 1966 $2,000,000 $28,400,000 7.8/10


           1. Remove stretch and size columns to data.




    Director                 Film            Released Budget          Gross     Rating
   John Ford             The Informer        May 1935 $243,000       $950,000 8.3/10
                     The Grapes of Wrath     Jan 1940 $800,000 $2,500,000 9/10
                 How Green Was My Valley Oct 1941 $800,000 $2,800,000 7.9/10
                        The Quiet Man         Jul 1952 $1,750,000 $3,200,000 8/10
 William Wyler           Mrs. Miniver        Jun 1942 $1,340,000 $8,878,000 7.8/10
                 The Best Years of Our Lives Nov 1946 $2,100,000 $23,700,000 8.6/10
                           Ben-Hur           Nov 1959 $15,200,000 $146,900,000 7.9/10
  Frank Capra      It Happened One Night     Feb 1934 $325,000 $2,500,000 8.9/10
                  Mr. Deeds Goes to Town Apr 1936 $845,710 $1,000,000 8.4/10
                 You Can’t Take It With You Aug 1938 $1,644,736 $5,295,526 7.6/10
  Billy Wilder        The Lost Weekend       Nov 1945 $1,250,000 $11,000,000 8.2/10
                        The Apartment        Jun 1960 $3,000,000 $24,600,000 8.5/10
   David Lean The Bridge on the River Kwai Oct 1957 $2,800,000 $30,600,000 9.2/10
                      Lawrence of Arabia     Dec 1962 $15,000,000 $70,000,000 9/10
Steven Spielberg        Schindler’s List     Nov 1993 $22,000,000 $321,200,000 9/10
                     Saving Private Ryan      Jul 1998 $70,000,000 $481,800,000 8.6/10
Fred Zinnemann      From Here to Eternity    Aug 1953 $2,500,000 $30,500,000 8.2/10
                    A Man for All Seasons    Dec 1966 $2,000,000 $28,400,000 7.8/10


           2. Remove fills, gridlines, border and bolding.
                                                                             Numerals and tables      138




                 Director         Film                         Released       Budget        Gross Rating
                 John Ford        The Informer                 May 1935     $243,000    $950,000 8.3/10
                                  The Grapes of Wrath          Jan 1940    $800,000 $2,500,000 9/10
                                  How Green Was My Valley      Oct 1941    $800,000 $2,800,000 7.9/10
                                  The Quiet Man                 Jul 1952 $1,750,000 $3,200,000 8/10
                 William Wyler Mrs. Miniver                    Jun 1942 $1,340,000 $8,878,000 7.8/10
                                  The Best Years of Our Lives Nov 1946 $2,100,000 $23,700,000 8.6/10
                                  Ben-Hur                      Nov 1959 $15,200,000 $146,900,000 7.9/10
                 Frank Capra      It Happened One Night        Feb 1934     $325,000 $2,500,000 8.9/10
                                  Mr. Deeds Goes to Town       Apr 1936     $845,710 $1,000,000 8.4/10
                                  You Can’t Take It With You Aug 1938 $1,644,736       $5,295,526 7.6/10
                 Billy Wilder     The Lost Weekend             Nov 1945 $1,250,000 $11,000,000 8.2/10
                                  The Apartment                Jun 1960 $3,000,000 $24,600,000 8.5/10
                 David Lean       The Bridge on the River Kwai Oct 1957 $2,800,000 $30,600,000 9.2/10
                                  Lawrence of Arabia           Dec 1962 $15,000,000 $70,000,000 9/10
                 Steven Spielberg Schindler’s List             Nov 1993 $22,000,000 $321,200,000 9/10
                                  Saving Private Ryan           Jul 1998 $70,000,000 $481,800,000 8.6/10
                 Fred Zinnemann From Here to Eternity          Aug 1953 $2,500,000 $30,500,000 8.2/10
                                  A Man for All Seasons        Dec 1966 $2,000,000 $28,400,000 7.8/10


3. Left-align text, right-align numbers and align headings with data.




    Director                 Film                                Released         Budget               Gross    Rating

    John Ford                The Informer                       May 1935        $243,000             $950,000   8.3/10
                             The Grapes of Wrath                Jan 1940        $800,000           $2,500,000     9/10
                             How Green Was My Valley            Oct 1941        $800,000           $2,800,000   7.9/10
                             The Quiet Man                       Jul 1952      $1,750,000          $3,200,000     8/10

    William Wyler            Mrs. Miniver                        Jun 1942      $1,340,000       $8,878,000      7.8/10
                             The Best Years of Our Lives        Nov 1946       $2,100,000      $23,700,000      8.6/10
                             Ben-Hur                            Nov 1959      $15,200,000     $146,900,000      7.9/10

    Frank Capra              It Happened One Night               Feb 1934       $325,000           $2,500,000   8.9/10
                             Mr. Deeds Goes to Town              Apr 1936        $845,710          $1,000,000   8.4/10
                             You Can’t Take It With You          Aug 1938      $1,644,736          $5,295,526   7.6/10

    Billy Wilder             The Lost Weekend                    Nov 1945     $1,250,000       $11,000,000      8.2/10
                             The Apartment                       Jun 1960     $3,000,000       $24,600,000      8.5/10

    David Lean               The Bridge on the River Kwai        Oct 1957      $2,800,000      $30,600,000      9.2/10
                             Lawrence of Arabia                  Dec 1962     $15,000,000      $70,000,000        9/10

    Steven Spielberg         Schindler’s List                    Nov 1993    $22,000,000      $321,200,000        9/10
                             Saving Private Ryan                  Jul 1998   $70,000,000      $481,800,000      8.6/10

    Fred Zinnemann           From Here to Eternity               Aug 1953     $2,500,000       $30,500,000      8.2/10
                             A Man for All Seasons               Dec 1966     $2,000,000       $28,400,000      7.8/10


4. Put white space to work to group and separate.
                139    Numerals and tables




Director              Film                                Released         Budget ($)            Gross ($)   Rating

John Ford             The Informer                      May 1935             243,000              950,000      8.3
                      The Grapes of Wrath                Jan 1940            800,000            2,500,000      9.0
                      How Green Was My Valley           Oct 1941             800,000            2,800,000      7.9
                      The Quiet Man                       Jul 1952         1,750,000            3,200,000      8.0

William Wyler         Mrs. Miniver                       Jun 1942         1,340,000            8,878,000       7.8
                      The Best Years of Our Lives        Nov 1946         2,100,000           23,700,000       8.6
                      Ben-Hur                            Nov 1959        15,200,000          146,900,000       7.9

Frank Capra           It Happened One Night              Feb 1934            325,000            2,500,000       8.9
                      Mr. Deeds Goes to Town             Apr 1936            845,710            1,000,000       8.4
                      You Can’t Take It With You         Aug 1938          1,644,736            5,295,526       7.6

Billy Wilder          The Lost Weekend                   Nov 1945          1,250,000          11,000,000        8.2
                      The Apartment                      Jun 1960          3,000,000          24,600,000        8.5

David Lean            The Bridge on the River Kwai       Oct 1957          2,800,000          30,600,000        9.2
                      Lawrence of Arabia                 Dec 1962         15,000,000          70,000,000        9.0

Steven Spielberg      Schindler’s List                   Nov 1993         22,000,000         321,200,000        9.0
                      Saving Private Ryan                 Jul 1998        70,000,000         481,800,000        8.6

Fred Zinnemann        From Here to Eternity              Aug 1953          2,500,000          30,500,000        8.2
                      A Man for All Seasons              Dec 1966          2,000,000          28,400,000        7.8


                       5. Use tabular lining numerals, consistent precision, and remove repetition.




                       Adapt tables to small screens
                       Tables regularly require a fair bit of horizontal space to display the infor-
                       mation they contain. Even when judiciously designed and edited, a typical
                       table may need to be wider than the 45 – 75 characters we normally allow
                       for paragraphs of text. For small screens, such as phones, designing read-
                       able tables which work under such cramped conditions presents us with
                       a serious challenge. The best approaches always deal with each table on
                       case-by-case basis, but that’s not always possible if we need to generically
                       style whatever comes out of a CMS database.
                           One immediate approach is to use either a condensed font or a slightly
                       smaller size (but not both smaller and condensed). In both cases, read-
                       ability must remain paramount and other options should also be explored.

                       Consider setting oblique headings to save space
                       One way to save horizontal space, particularly when you have short pieces
                       of data but long headings, is to set the headings at an oblique angle.
                                                                 Numerals and tables   140




  Celciu
        s (°
            C)
  Fah
     ren
         he  it (°F)
     0      32
    10      50
    20      68
    30      86
    40     104
    50     122
    60     140
    70     158
    80     194
    90     194
   100     212
                         Using oblique headings to save space.


You can use a simple CSS translation to achieve the effect. You will also need
to absolutely position the headings so the original width of the columns
isn’t retained and they shrink to wrap the data instead.

   th {
      transform-origin: bottom left;
      position: absolute;
   }

   th.degC {
      transform: translate(2.58em,-2em) rotate(-60deg);
   }

   th.degF {
      transform: translate(5.14em,-2em) rotate(-60deg);
   }

Let the browser handle tables with horizontal scrolling
The simplest solution to help tables of any size and complexity is to let
the browser lay out the table as best it can and render part of the table off-
screen as necessary. Provided you then enable your reader to scroll the table
sideways independently of the rest of the text, the table can be relatively
easily brought into view.
141   Numerals and tables




                   Meals
         this week’s menu
                   monday                  tuesday
         Soup      Pea and mint topped     Tomato and pesto oil
                   with shredded spring    with parmesan
                   onion
         Bistro    Chicken stroganoff,     Teriyaki salmon on
         dish      with mushrooms and      coriander and
                   cream                   vegetable noodles
         Comfort   Butchers pork           Beef bolognese with
         food      sausages, caramelised   garlic bread
                   red onion jus
         Desert    Apple and cranberry     Syrup sponge pudding
                   crumble, custard        with crème fraiche
                                                                Using a crawl bar to scroll
                                                                a table into view.


         We know that eating well is important
         both to being able to function at our best
         during
      To do      eachfirst
             this,     day and
                           wrapto our well-being
                                   your   table in a <figure> element:
         over life. We serve a good range of
         healthy food — something for all.
         <figure class="fig-table">
            <table> … </table>
         </figure>

      Then apply the following simple rules to hide the portion of the table off-
      screen and enable your reader to scroll the table without affecting the rest
      of the text:

         .fig-table {
            max-width: 100%;
            overflow-x: scroll;
         }

      It is important not to set a width on your table; the browser can then
      compress the table as far as it can before overflowing off the screen. To
      preserve readability, make good use of non-breaking spaces and white-
      space:nowrap to limit the amount the data wraps in the cells. It’s better
      to have a readable table that requires scrolling than an unreadable one
      which doesn’t.
                                                              Numerals and tables   142




Linearise simple tables into lists
You can safely linearise simple data tables when space is limited. The tables
most suitable for this treatment are lists of structured data; for example,
an employee directory:

  Name               Email                            Title                         Phone

  Jones, Claire      claire.jones@domain.com          Managing Director             01234 567890

  Smith, Darren      darren.smith@domain.com          Head of Sales                 01234 567891



When there is not enough room for the table to render comfortably, we
can set it with a completely different layout. This is less compact overall,
and takes more space vertically, but it succeeds in fitting the table into a
much narrower viewport:

  Name:       Jones, Claire
  Email:      claire.jones@domain.com
  Title:      Managing Director
  Phone:      01234 567890

  Name:       Smith, Darren
  Email:      darren.smith@domain.com
  Title:      Head of Sales
  Phone:      01234 567891


The two renderings of our employee directory table use exactly the same
markup, comprising the conventional HTML elements you would expect in
any table. The one addition is a data-title attribute on each cell enabling
us to repeat the label in the list view, should we need to.

   <th data-title="Name">Jones, Claire</th>
   <th data-title="Email">claire.jones@domain.com</th>
   <th data-title="Title">Managing Director</th>
   <th data-title="Phone">01234&nbsp;567890</th>

There are four simple steps to turning the table into a list, using a media
query and CSS (no JavaScript is required).
143   Numerals and tables




      1. Identify the viewport width at which the table starts to render poorly.
      2. Apply display:block to all table-related elements so they align verti-
         cally instead of as a table.
      3. Hide the header row and any empty cells.
      4. Display labels for each data item (optional).

      You will need to apply some additional styling for aesthetics and reada-
      bility, but the responsiveness described can be accomplished in these few
      lines of CSS:

          @media (max-width: 25em) {
             table, caption, tbody, tr, th, td {
          		display: block;
          		text-align: left;
             }
             thead, th:empty, td:empty {
          		display: none;
          		visibility: hidden;
             }
             th[data-title]:before, td[data-title]:before {
          		content: attr(data-title) ": ";
          		display: inline-block;
          		width: 3.5em;
             }
          }

      This technique was first popularised by Aaron Gustafson4.

      Make tables responsive according to their purpose
      There are many different techniques5 available for making data tables
      responsive. Some are simple CSS-only methods (we’ve covered two already);
      others are complex, enhanced by JavaScript. When considering which tech-
      nique to use, ask yourself how your reader will use the table. In particular,
      consider if your reader is likely to compare either rows or columns – these
      kinds of tables need extra attention owing to the way they are used.
         When being able to compare columns is important, one method is
      to hide non-essential fields and provide an option to turn them back on.


      4   ‘Responsive Tables’ (http://wbtyp.net/16) by Aaron Gustafson on Easy Designs blog (2013).
      5   See CSS-Tricks’ ‘Responsive Tables’ (http://wbtyp.net/148) for the latest options.
                                                                     Numerals and tables   144




This technique was popularised by Filament Group6 using a stocks table
as an example:




A data-rich table rendered on a large screen.




The same table with hidden columns and options to toggle.


Tables are a frequently overlooked aspect of reading, sometimes overstyled,
sometimes poorly thought out. Responsiveness is a particularly thorny
issue as the best solutions depend very much on the utility of the table.
Tables can be packed with data, rich in content and meaning. Give them
the attention they deserve.




6   Filament Group’s ‘Tablesaw’ (http://wbtyp.net/15) responsive table plug-ins.
145   Tracking and kerning




      Tracking and
      kerning

      Kerning and tracking are techniques for adjusting the spacing
      between letters. They are an important aspect of improving the
      legibility, readability and overall look of your text.


      Kern your text to improve readability
      Kerning is a local adjustment between two characters. Kern text to eliminate
      awkward spacing between two adjacent letters, reducing unsightliness and
      the potential for confusion. Although far easier with digital typography,
      kerning has been around since the days of moveable type.




      Kerning in metal type (reversed). © Barbara Hauser


      Kerning can mean the addition or reduction of space between two char-
      acters. Depending on the typeface design, different character pairs need
      different amounts of kerning. There are some critical character combina-
      tions which almost always need kerning; for example, capital W followed
      by a lowercase letter:
                                                                      Tracking and kerning   146




Without kerning, words like ‘World’ and ‘Web’ can be split asunder.


Inside font files, kerning instructions are stored in tables. These are large
two-dimensional matrices which, for each character pair, show whether
they should be drawn closer or pushed apart, and by how much. A modest
typeface with around 250 characters might have 1,500 character pairs
requiring kerning. A more fully featured font with 1,000 glyphs might
have over 50,000 kerning pairs.




Kerning table showing Feijoa Medium with 50,583 kerning pairs.


Under the hood of a font, kerning tables are stored in one or two places. The
glyph positioning (GPOS) table, which defines all manner of glyph adjust-
ments, may include kerning instructions. Alternatively, the OpenType
kern table may be used. The choice of where to store the information is
down to the type designer or foundry and usually won’t affect us, with
one exception.
   In the CSS3 fonts specification, kerning is turned on by default (and
this is respected by all modern browsers). Should you want to explicitly
147   Tracking and kerning




      disable or re-enable kerning, use the font-kerning property as this works
      with both types of kerning data. (Browsers will use the data in the GPOS
      table in preference to the kern table.)

         h1 { font-kerning: normal; } /* turn on kerning */

         footer { font-kerning: none; }

      Be aware that if you use the font shorthand property then font-kerning
      is reset to its initial value – but because you can’t set font-kerning with
      the font shorthand, you may have to restate the property.
          Legacy browsers that don’t support font-kerning can access kerning
      if there is an OpenType kern table present. This is a feature tag like any
      other, so you can use the font-feature-settings property to turn it on.
      The downside is that if you apply letter spacing to the text it will remove
      the kerning, whereas if you use font-kerning then the kerning will stay
      applied, as it should. Therefore, use a negated @supports rule so only legacy
      browsers get the problematic font-feature-settings property.

         h1 { font-feature-settings: "kern" 1 }

         @supports (kerning: normal) {
            h1 { font-feature-settings: normal; kerning: normal; }
         }

      Not all fonts have kerning tables, including many free or low-quality fonts.
      In some cases, web fonts may have had kerning data removed to save on
      file size. If you’re trying to turn on kerning and it doesn’t seem to be work-
      ing, that could be why.


      Letterspace your text rarely and carefully
      Tracking is a global change affecting many characters simultaneously to the
      same extent. Tracking, or letterspacing, is the tightening or loosening of
      spacing between the letters in a block of text. Unlike kerning, which affects
      only designated pairs of letters, tracking affects all the characters equally.
         Adjusting tracking in the right circumstances can improve the reada-
      bility in segments of text, just like a little sugar is sometimes necessary to
      enhance a sauce. And just as too much sugar will ruin a dish, so too much
      tracking adjustment can leave text illegible.
                                                                              Tracking and kerning   148




Don’t letterspace lowercase without good cause
When there is sufficient white space around characters, the individual let-
ters emerge and can be recognised by your reader more quickly. In a profes-
sionally designed font, you can expect correct spacing between characters
to be built into the font and not need any further adjustment. If you have
chosen a font for your body text and think it needs extra spacing (or possi-
bly tightening), first of all question your choice of typeface. Perhaps it’s not
of the quality you were expecting – if the tracking is off, what else might
be wrong? Ensure you are making a decision about readability and not at-a-
glance aesthetics. As always, test your decision on multiple devices.
    Letterspaced text, stretched beyond a relaxed body composition, looks
affected and overstyled. Any font with a calligraphic link between letters,
such as a Garamond or other old-style serif face, will be destroyed by track-
ing adjustments. As the type designer Frederic Goudy supposedly said1:




The elegant flow of Calluna, a contemporary old-style font, is ruined by letterspacing.


Worse still, additional letterspacing may isolate individual letters and
make it harder for your reader to recognise groups of letters or perceive
whole words.

Letterspace all strings of capitals and all long strings
of digits
Letterspace strings of capitals including WHOLE WORDS in the middle
of sentences, but don’t letterspace strings of initials. In instances such as
Doogie Howser, M. D. and J K Rowling, slightly separate the initials using
narrow no-break spaces as described in ‘Symbols, signs and accents’. It’s
not usually necessary to add extra spacing to small caps as the spacing is
built in to most fonts.


1   Most sources claim that Goudy referred to blackletter rather than lowercase, and that
    being stolen was the least of the sheep’s worries!
            149   Tracking and kerning




                  Add tracking where you have three or more digits in a row, such as phone
                  numbers and serial numbers. In both cases, add around 5% spacing using
                  the letter-spacing property, combined with a positive value set in ems:

                      .caps { letter-spacing: 0.05em; } /* add 5% spacing */

                  For headings set in all capitals, try adding even more spacing, particularly
                  if the heading is set in a lightweight font. If the spaces between letters are
                  large enough to fit more letters, you’ve gone overboard.




                  FINE NORFOLK HAY
This is very fine, soft red fescue hay. It is harvested late to reduce the level of sugar and



          F I NE NOR FOLK HAY
This is very fine, soft red fescue hay. It is harvested late to reduce the level of sugar and


                  Top: Kerned but not letterspaced; Bottom: Letterspaced caps.


                  Eliminate erroneous spaces after last letters
                  The CSS Text Module Level 3 specification says that ‘letter-spacing must
                  not be applied at the beginning or at the end of a line’. At the time of writ-
                  ing, no web browser follows this – they all add letterspacing after each
                  letter, including the last character of the selected text. For small fonts or
                  left-aligned text this is not a problem and your reader will not notice the
                  erroneous space. However, on large, centred text its presence can throw off
                  the alignment of text. In these situations, you can offset the effect of the
                  errant white space on the last letter by applying a negative right margin
                  the same size as the letterspacing:

                     h1 {
                        text-align: center;
                        text-transform: uppercase;
                        letter-spacing: 0.5em;
                        margin-right: -0.5em;
                     }
                                                           Tracking and kerning   150




Note that if you are justifying text, the letterspacing is added before the
justification algorithm is applied.

Gently tighten big, bold and wide fonts
The bigger, bolder and wider the font, the tighter the tracking can be. By
reducing the letterspacing a little, a more even colour can be achieved while
keeping the letterforms distinct. In this example, the heading set in Value
has been tightened by 3%:

    h1 { letter-spacing: -0.03em; }




Tracking tightened by 3% improves colour.


Some sans serif text faces can also benefit from a little tightening. These
are the exception rather than the rule, but the digital fonts of Univers, for
example, come quite loosely tracked, as were their original metal forms.
Univers can therefore accommodate some modest tightening of the letter
spaces, even at body sizes.

    p { letter-spacing: -0.01em; }




Tightening Univers by 1% gives a more contemporary feel.
151   Tracking and kerning




      Be very careful when tightening tracking. Do so judiciously and test exten-
      sively to ensure that you keep adequate spacing between letters, so that
      you don’t make any unfortunate joins. For example, cl can become a d; LI
      can join to form a U; and Fi can end up as an A. These can can cause embar-
      rassment with words like click, FLICKER and Final.

      Turn off ligatures if increasing letterspacing
      According to the CSS3 Text module, browsers shouldn’t apply ligatures
      when tracking text. At the time of writing, however, all browsers replace
      character pairs with ligatures regardless of letterspacing. Since a ligature
      is a single character, its internal spacing won’t change when you tighten
      or open up the tracking, resulting in this kind of unevenness:




      Ligatures are not required when letterspacing.


      If you find it’s necessary to turn off ligatures when letterspacing, apply
      font-variant-ligatures and its font-feature-settings fallback:

          h1 {
             letter-spacing: 0.1em;
             font-feature-settings: "liga" 0;
          }
          @supports (font-variant-ligatures: no-common-ligatures) {
             h1 {
          		font-feature-settings: normal;
          		font-variant-ligatures: no-common-ligatures;
             }
          }

      Alternatively, don’t letterspace lowercase text any more than the tracking
      already built into the font. Remember what Goudy would think of you.
                                                                   Headlines and impact   152




Headlines
and impact

Typography can broadly be divided into two roles: novels and
billboards1. That is, immersion and interruption; reading and
impact. Billboards are settings of display type used to grab the
reader’s attention. Provided it looks good, they can break many
of the normal typographic rules but must still be handled with
care and attention.

Headings and display text are your attention-grabbers. They set the scene
and draw people in. Readers will reward the time you spent designing the
typography with their attention.


Set text at display sizes, even on small screens
In ‘Why web typography really does matter’ we established how scientific
studies have shown how good typography can improve your reader’s mood
and overall experience without them even knowing it. If you set your dis-
play text at a large size, it stands to reason that you can have a bigger effect
on your reader. When you set text big, by which we mean at least three
times the body size, your visitors will see it before they read it. The initial
impression of your text setting and choice of font will elicit a subconscious
emotional reaction in your reader (see ‘Choosing typefaces for display’ for
why and how), enabling you to set a mood for the content to follow. Con-
sider large text the same way you might a photograph: a picture of type
that creates an atmosphere and anchors your layout.
    Movie posters, book covers and, in particular, magazine spreads all use
this approach to great effect. When opened up, magazines are roughly the
same size as a large display. Take a lead from their conventions and don’t

1   A description coined by British designer Jon Tan (http://wbtyp.net/146).
153   Headlines and impact




      be afraid to be generous with your text size. Don’t forgo the opportunity
      to make the same initial impact on a screen that designers do in print.




      A magazine spread is similar in size and shape to a large screen.


      You can clearly make an impression when you have a canvas as large as a
      27" display, but can you really have that kind of impact on a screen so small
      it fits in your pocket? Yes, arguably so.
           The magazine illustrated2 has headline text set at 72 pt. To achieve the
      same physical size (roughly 25 mm) on a large screen, you would set your
      headline text to about 98 px. Given a typical viewing distance of 60 cm, we
      can calculate the perceived size of that type to be 145 arcmins (as intro-
      duced in ‘Responsive paragraphs’).
           Smartphones are read from much closer than desktop displays, typ-
      ically 30 cm. Text viewed from that distance, having the same perceived
      size of 145 arcmins, would need to be around 13 mm on the screen. This
      equates to around 48 px, which is easily accommodated on a small screen.

      2   Issue 3 of The Great Discontent (http://wbtyp.net/147).
                                                                             Headlines and impact   154




Same perceived text size at different viewing distances. Image courtesy SizeCalc.com


Because smartphones are held close to the face, filling your reader’s field
of vision, you can indeed set a mood and induce a reaction if you consider
setting type as display text even on such a small device.


Resize display text as you would an image
As we discussed in ‘Hierarchy and scale’, we choose text and heading sizes
appropriate to the viewport dimensions from a predefined scale. We set those
sizes using rems, locking the text sizes together so they all scale according
to the page default and your reader’s preferences. You can take the same
approach with display text by choosing larger sizes from the same scale.
    Display text, however, as defined by its purpose and relative size, is text
to be seen first and read second; in other words, a picture of text. When it
comes to pictures, you are likely to scale all scene-setting imagery – cover
photos, hero images, and so on – relative to the viewport. Take the same
approach with display text: lock the size and shape of the text to the screen
or browser window.

Introducing viewport units
With CSS3 came a new set of units which are locked to the viewport. You                                   A reference pixel is
can use these viewport units wherever you might otherwise use any other                                   based on the logical
                                                                                                          resolution of a
unit of length, such as pixels, ems or percentages. There are four viewport                               device which takes
units, and in each case a value of 1 is equal to 1% of either the viewport                                into account double-
width or height as reported in reference pixels:                                                          density screens such
                                                                                                          as Retina displays.

•   vw – viewport width
•   vh – viewport height
•   vmin – viewport height or width, whichever is smaller
•   vmax – viewport height or width, whichever is larger
155   Headlines and impact




      In one fell swoop you can set the size of a display heading to be propor-
      tional to the screen or browser width, rather than choosing from a scale
      in a series of media queries. The following makes the heading’s font size
      13% of the viewport width:

          h1 {
             font-size: 13vw;
          }

      For a selection of widths, the rendered font size would be:

      Viewport width             13 vw

                        320         42

                        768        100

                      1,024        133

                      1,280        166

                      1,920        250

      Rendered font size (px).


      A problem with using vw in this manner is the difference in text block pro-
      portions between portrait and landscape devices. Because the font size is
      based on the viewport width, the text on a landscape display is far bigger
      than when rendered on the same device held in a portrait orientation.
         The proportions of the display text relative to the screen are so dis-
      similar that each orientation has its own different character, losing the
      consistency and considered design you need when endeavouring to make
      an impression.
         If the text was the same size in both orientations, the visual effect
      would be much more consistent. This is where vmin comes into its own.
      Set the font size using vmin and the size is now set as a proportion of the
      smallest side of the viewport, giving you a far more consistent rendering.

          h1 {
             font-size: 13vmin;
          }
                                                                         Headlines and impact   156




      The Meaning
       of Science
                                                                  The Meaning
                                                                   of Science

vw units
Landscape text is much bigger than portrait text when using vw units.




      The Meaning
       of Science
                                                                         The Meaning
                                                                          of Science



vmin units
Landscape text is consistent with portrait text when using vmin units.
157   Headlines and impact




      Comparing vw and vmin renderings for various common screen dimensions,
      you can see how using vmin keeps the text size down to a usable magnitude:

       Viewport                  13 vw   13 vmin

       320 × 480                    42        42

       414 × 736                    54        54

       768 × 1024                  100       100

      1024 × 768                   133       100

      1280 × 720                   166        94

      1366 × 768                   178       100

      1440 × 900                   187       117

      1680 × 1050                  218       137

      1920 × 1080                  250       140

      2560 × 1440                  333       187

      Rendered font size (px).


      Hybrid font sizing
      Using vertical media queries to set text in direct proportion to screen
      dimensions works well when sizing display text. It can be less desirable
      when sizing supporting text such as subheadings, which you may not want
      to scale upwards at the same rate as the display text. For example, we can
      size a subheading using vmin so that it starts at 16 px on smaller screens
      and scales up in the same way as the main heading:

          h1 {
             font-size: 13vmin;
          }

          h2 {
             font-size: 5vmin;
          }
                                                                       Headlines and impact   158




                                                     The Meaning
  The Meaning
                                                      of Science
   of Science
      What is science? What are its
                                                          What is science? What are its
   limits? Can it tell us everything that
            is worth knowing?                          limits? Can it tell us everything that
                                                                is worth knowing?




Using vmin alone for supporting text can scale it too quickly.


The balance of display text to supporting text on the phone works well,
but the subheading text on the tablet, even though it has been increased
in line with the main heading, is starting to feel disproportionately large
and a little clumsy. This problem is only exacerbated on bigger screens.
   A solution to this is to use a hybrid method of sizing text. We can use
the CSS calc() function to calculate a font size based simultaneously on
rems and viewport units. For example:

    h2 {
       font-size: calc(0.5rem + 2.5vmin);
    }

For a 320 px wide screen, the font size will be 16 px, calculated as follows:

    (0.5 × 16) + (320 × 0.025) = 8 + 8 = 16px

For a 768 px wide screen, the font size will be 27 px:

    (0.5 × 16) + (768 × 0.025) = 8 + 19 = 27px
                                 159     Headlines and impact




                                         This results in a more balanced subheading that doesn’t take emphasis
                                         away from the main heading:




                                                                The Meaning
The Meaning                                                      of Science
 of Science                                                            What is science? What are its limits? Can it
   What is science? What are its
limits? Can it tell us everything that                                 tell us everything that is worth knowing?
         is worth knowing?




                                         To give you an idea of the effect of using a hybrid approach, here’s a side-
                                         by-side comparison of hybrid and viewport text sizing:




                                             16     20        27          32              35                40        44
                                             16
                                             320
                                                    24
                                                    480
                                                             38 48 54
                                                               768          960            1080
                                                                                                         64 721280    1440


                                         Top: calc( ) hybrid method; Bottom: vmin only


                                         Experiment with the proportion of rem and vmin in your hybrid calculation
                                         to see what feels best for your particular setting.

                                         Attend to wide, shallow screens
                                         Sizing display text using vmin will always take into account both the width
                                         and the height of a viewport, and base the text size on the smallest dimen-
                                         sion. If you are using a different method to size your display text – perhaps
                                                           Headlines and impact   160




you are picking sizes from a scale – then you must also account for the
screen height. This applies not just to the text size, but to the white space
which surrounds it.
   For example, on large screens you may wish to set some substantial
display text in generous white space, using something like:

   @media screen and (min-width: 90em) {
      h1 {
   		font-size: 6rem;
   		margin-top: 2em;
   		margin-bottom: 4em;
      }
   }

But if that viewport is particularly shallow – it might be an unusually wide
screen, or your reader has resized their window in such a way – then the
heading may feel disproportionately large, with the added white space push-
ing the content too far down. To address this situation, add a vertical media
expression, so that the large text and spacing is only rendered on screens
which are both wide and tall enough. Given that most widescreen displays
have aspect ratios of around 16:9, as a rule of thumb for your vertical media
expression, specify the minimum height to be half the minimum width.

   @media screen and (min-width: 90em) and (min-height: 45em) { … }

You can additionally specify your white space using viewport units. This
is a particularly beneficial tactic if your white space is substantial, as you
can tie it to the viewport dimensions both stylistically and practically. For
example, you can use rules like this to keep your vertical space relative to
the viewport at all sizes:

   h1 {
      font-size: 2rem;
      margin-top: 25vh;
      margin-bottom: 1em;
   }

   @media screen and (min-width: 90em) and (min-height: 45em) {
      h1 { font-size: 6rem; }
   }
161   Headlines and impact




      Typesetting display text
      Earlier we saw how display text works in the first instance as a picture
      setting an emotional tone, and is read after that first impression has been
      made. The picture-painting role of display text leaves you free to break
      rules, so long as you ensure the text is ultimately legible. That said, display
      text brings with it an additional set of considerations.

      Pay attention to the shape of the text
      True responsive design allows for fluid layouts, where lines of text inher-
      ently vary. Computers acting this way don’t have a sense of what’s good or
      bad – they can’t make informed typographic decisions. Normally the rules
      you can provide in CSS will enable you to get body text set comfortably.
      Short passages of text provided for impact will still need a human hand.



          Responsive design is not
             about ﬁnding the
          perfect design, it’s about
              ﬁnding the best
                compromise

      Default browser settings can be ugly.


      If you are in the (fortunate) position to know the precise words you are set-
      ting, then consider where you break lines and the aesthetic shape of your
      arrangement, particularly when centring text, but also when aligning left
      or right. A simple guideline is to alternate line lengths as this produces a
      more considered and balanced setting.



               Responsive design                                   Responsive design is
           is not about ﬁnding the                                  not about ﬁnding
                 perfect design,                                  the perfect design, it’s
             it’s about ﬁnding the                                  about ﬁnding the
                best compromise                                     best compromise

      Alternating text settings. Left: short, long. Right: long, short.
                                                                    Headlines and impact   162




In the example above, both settings alternate shorter and longer lines.
You’ll consider one to be better than the other (I prefer short, long in this
instance). The important thing is to control the setting if you can – don’t
leave such subtleties to the vagaries of computer algorithms. If you find
yourself judiciously inserting <br>s to set the text, then check your fluid
layout doesn’t fall apart with unintended line wraps.
   A useful tactic for width-sensitive text blocks is to set the width using
character units, like this:

   .example { width: 21ch; }

As explained in ‘The amazing em (and friends)’, one ch is equivalent to
the width of the 0 (zero) character in the rendered font. This means the
width of a text block will vary with the design of the font in such a way as
to keep the line breaks consistent. This is particularly useful for handling
fallback system fonts when you’re using display text with very narrow or
wide web fonts (see ‘Using web fonts’).

Visually centre text or hang punctuation
In ‘Meaning and semantics’ we saw that quoted passages of text with left
or right alignment should have the punctuation marks in the margin.
This ensures the start of each new line is aligned with the previous one,
making the text block more pleasing to look at and to read. This require-
ment becomes even more apparent with text set at display sizes:



           “One more attribute the modern typographer
           must have: the capacity for taking great pains
           with seemingly unimportant detail.”


          “One more attribute the modern typographer
           must have: the capacity for taking great pains
           with seemingly unimportant detail.”

Top: Quote set as is. Bottom: Quote set with hanging punctuation.
163   Headlines and impact




      If you are centre-aligning a text block with punctuation, the same thinking
      applies. Instead of hanging the quotes, visually align the text by setting it
      as if there were no punctuation marks, then add the punctuation back in.



                “One more attribute the modern typographer
                must have: the capacity for taking great pains
                   with seemingly unimportant detail.”


                “One more attribute the modern typographer
                must have: the capacity for taking great pains
                     with seemingly unimportant detail.”

      Top: Quote set as is. Bottom: Quote set visually centred.


      Whether centring text or hanging punctuation, you can handle the visual
      alignment by setting negative margins on the punctuation. For example:

          blockquote {
             text-align: center;
             position: relative;
          }

          blockquote::before {
             content: '“';
             margin-left: -0.6ch;
          }

          blockquote::after {
             content: '.”';
             margin-right: -1.1ch;
          }

      It’s worth restating that you should be extra careful to punctuate correctly
      when setting text at display sizes. Erroneous use of hyphens or neutral
      quotes will show up even more with big text.
                                                                             Headlines and impact   164




Prevent widows in headings
A widow is a single word which drops onto the final line of a heading (or
any other block of text). Unless you have specifically designed it to be there,
widows tend to look unsightly. Use a non-breaking space &nbsp; between
the final two words of a heading to prevent widows dropping down.

Adjust line spacing for evenness of colour
In ‘Tracking and kerning’ we learned that bold fonts require tighter track-
ing. The same is true of their line spacing, particularly at large sizes. Sim-
pler geometric sans serif typefaces also benefit from tighter line spacing.
Setting solid using line-height:1; is a good starting point. Lightweight,
thin fonts need a touch more spacing, just as more ornate seriffed fonts
need room to breathe and strut their stuff.
    If you are setting in all caps, then you will probably need to set the
line height to less than 1 (try 0.75 to begin with, and experiment). Be wary,
though, as capital letters have many vertical strokes. Set lines of caps too
close and the verticals start to resemble a page of prison bars.




Calypso E Heavy and Light require tighter and looser line spacing respectively.


When you tighten line height to 1 or less, you increase the chance of clash,
as introduced in ‘Meaning and semantics’. A simple rule is that ascenders
and descenders should not touch, but that rule can be suspended if aesthet-
ics dictate. Sometimes you may wish to set very tight line spacing for stylis-
tic reasons. Perhaps the letters nicely interweave and create a harmonious,
readable effect, or perhaps the text calls for deliberately obscured reading.
165   Headlines and impact




      All rules are there to be broken if – and only if – the text calls for it and the
      picture you are painting benefits.




      Erik Spiekermann on line spacing in Rhyme and Reason, set in Spike Spondike’s Blenny.



      Make the most of a font’s hidden gems
      Many typefaces include features enabling you to be even more creative and
      expressive in your typesetting. These hidden gems are accessible through
      OpenType technology (introduced in ‘Ligatures and abbreviations’) and
      include specially designed optional letterforms such as swashes, ligatures
      and alternates. These can bring your display text to life in unique, unusual
      and beautiful ways.

      Swashes
      Use swashes to add an air of sophistication to your text. They provide a
      typographic flourish, by way of flamboyant additions to a character, such
      as an exaggerated serif, tail or entry stroke.
                                                                        Headlines and impact   166




Trilogy Fatface is made even more flamboyant with contextual swashes.


Turn on swashes using the font-variant-alternates property with a
value of swash(1).

    .swsh { font-variant-alternates: swash(1); }

Some fonts have more than one swash design for certain characters. These
are stored in numbered tables which you access using swash(2), for example.
To provide support for legacy browsers, use the swsh OpenType tag with
the font-feature-settings property.

   .swsh {
      font-feature-settings: "swsh" 1;
      @supports (font-variant-alternates: swash(1)) {
   		.swsh {
   			font-feature-settings: normal;
   			font-variant-alternates: swash(1);
   		}
      }
   }

Trilogy Fatface (featured above) makes extensive use of contextual swashes.
Its designer, Jeremy Tankard, programmed the font to swap in swashes
which are appropriate for the start, middle or end of words, thus avoiding
awkward clashes or gaps. Typefaces with this attention to detail are unusual.
    Using OpenType features often requires a certain amount of manual
intervention. You will usually need to mark up each of the characters you
swap out to target precisely the changes you need. If you don’t, and the
font you’re using is loaded with alternates – Bookmania in the following
example has swashes for all the letters in Margarita – you would get an
unappetising mess instead of a delicious concoction.
167   Headlines and impact




          <h1><span class="swsh">M</span>ar<span class="swsh">g
             </span>arit<span class="swsh">a</span></h1>




      Just a few of the multitude of swashes in Bookmania.


      Discretionary and historical ligatures
      We touched on discretionary and historical alternates in ‘Ligatures and
      abbreviations’ and were warned against using them in running text.
      In display text, however, they can capture the attention effectively, lending
      a glamorous, bygone or unique feel.




      Using discretionary ligatures in Salomé and Bague Sans to lend antiquity and glamour respectively.


      You can turn on discretionary ligatures and historical ligatures by using
      the font-variant-ligatures property:

          .dlig { font-variant-ligatures: discretionary-ligatures; }
          .hist { font-variant-ligatures: historical-ligatures; }

      For legacy browsers requiring font-feature-settings, use the dlig and
      hist OpenType feature tags.
                                                                        Headlines and impact   168




Stylistic alternates and style sets
Many fonts contain alternative glyphs that don’t fit into a clear category
like swash or historical. You can select these alternates on an individual
basis using font-variant-alternates:stylistic(1) where 1 is the fea-
ture number. It is equivalent to the salt(1) OpenType tag.




Blenny has an alternative ampersand.


Some fonts also contain entire sets of stylistic variants, such as multiple
variants for all or some of the lowercase letters. These stylistic sets are often
designed to harmonise visually or interact in particular ways. These sets are
also numbered, and accessible using font-variant-alternates:styleset(1),
equivalent to the ss01 OpenType tag.




Enclosed caps as style set 6 in Omnes Bold.


You can turn on multiple style sets by space-separating the values:

    .ss03_04 { font-variant-alternates: styleset(3) styleset(4); }




Alternative I, g, y and a turned on with style sets 3 and 4 in Omnes.
169   Headlines and impact




      Gabriola, designed by John Hudson for Microsoft, has contextual aware-
      ness built into the alternative styles, ensuring that calligraphic features
      are applied intelligently. Gabriola has seven style sets defined. Turning on
      style set 7 with support for legacy browsers:

          .ss07 {
             font-feature-settings: "ss07" 1;
             @supports (font-variant-alternates: styleset(7)) {
          		.ss07 {
          			font-feature-settings: normal;
          			font-variant-alternates: styleset(7);
          		}
             }
          }




      Turning on style set 7 in Gabriola displays contextual calligraphic ornaments. These automatically
      adapt to the word’s position in the line.


      Seek out OpenType features
      OpenType features are buried within font files and eminently undiscover-
      able. At the time of writing, no software adequately exposes the features
      available within a given font file. Some font management and design soft-
      ware will tell you whether a feature, such as swash alternates, is available
      in a font, but won’t tell you which characters will be swapped out, let alone
      what the alternates actually look like.
          Use this to your advantage. Visit the font designer’s website and find
      the samples and specimens any good foundry will have created for its
      fonts. These should show you all the alternative characters available and
      how to access them. Use what you find to create a truly unique design with
      features that most designers simply will not have put in the effort to find.
                                                          Headlines and impact   170




Accessing OpenType alternates in CSS
We’ve covered the more common kinds of aesthetic alternative charac-
ters in this section. As you delve deeper into fonts you may come across
other kinds. The full list of features accessible through font-variant- as
defined in CSS3 is:

Feature                  CSS property                                              OpenType tag

common ligatures         font-variant-ligatures: common-ligatures                  liga

discretionary ligatures font-variant-ligatures: discretionary-ligatures            dlig

historical ligatures     font-variant-ligatures: historical-ligatures              hist

contextual alternates    font-variant-ligatures: contextual                        calt

historical forms         font-variant-alternates: historical-forms                 hist

stylistic alternates     font-variant-alternates: stylistic(n)                     salt n

style sets               font-variant-alternates: styleset(1–99)                   ss01 – ss99

character variants       font-variant-alternates: character-variant(1–99) cv01 – cv99

swash glyphs             font-variant-alternates: swash(n)                         swsh n, cswh n

ornaments                font-variant-alternates: ornaments(n)                     ornm n

annotation forms         font-variant-alternates: annotation(n)                    nalt n


We opened the chapter by describing how display type is more akin to a
billboard than a novel. On the web, good design is firstly about making
people want to read, then about telling stories. We use display type, set
well, with perhaps a unique twist, to grab our reader’s attention, take them
by the hand and lead them into the stories we are telling.
171   Applying vertical rhythm




      Applying vertical
      rhythm

      Just as regular use of time provides rhythm in music, so regular
      use of space provides rhythm in typography. Without rhythm,
      the listener or reader becomes disorientated and lost.


      Apply vertical space in measured intervals
      The vertical rhythm of a design is formed by the arrangement and spacing
      of text encountered by your reader as they descend the page. If spacing
      between lines and blocks is inconsistent, the rhythm will be inconsistent,
      leading at best to an untidy feel to the composition, and at worst a jarring
      reading experience.
          Composing to a vertical rhythm helps engage and guide the reader
      down the page, but it takes typographic discipline to do so. It may seem
      like a lot of fiddly maths is involved (a few divisions and multiplications
      never hurt anyone) but good typesetting is all about numbers, and it is this
      attention to detail which is the key to success.
         You set the vertical rhythm for a page when you decide on the line
      height for your body text. If you have 16 px body text with a line height
      of 21 px then your basic unit of vertical space is also 21 px. To establish
      a vertical rhythm on the page, ensure that all vertical spacing, including
      margins and the line heights of other text elements, is a factor of 21. A solid,
      dependable vertical rhythm will engage and guide your reader down the
      page and through the text.
          Rhythm is commonly lost in the spacing between paragraphs. By default,
      browsers insert a top- and bottom-margin of 1 em. In our case, this would
      add 16 px between paragraphs and throw the text out of the beat of the page.
      To maintain rhythm, space the paragraphs apart by an amount related to
      the basic line height. Simply set the bottom margin equal to the line height.
                                                       Applying vertical rhythm   172




   body {
      font-size: 1rem;     /* 16px */
      line-height: 1.3125; /* 21px */
   }

   p {
      margin-top: 0;
      margin-bottom: 1.3125em; /* 21px */
   }

If you prefer your paragraph spacing tighter, try making it equivalent to
half the line height instead.

Use a basic reset to ensure consistency
Browsers set their own margins on all block-level elements including
headings, lists, block quotes and tables. Apply a basic reset to all block-
level elements, removing their margins and padding, and providing a solid
foundation on which you can explicitly declare your design intentions.
The following will cover most bases:

   html, body, section, nav, article, aside, h1, h2, h3,
   h4, h5, h6, hgroup, header, footer, address, p, hr, pre,
   blockquote, ol, ul, li, dl, dt, dd, figure, figcaption,
   div, table, caption, form, fieldset {
      vertical-align: baseline;
      margin: 0;
      padding: 0;
   }

When there is a change in text size, perhaps with a heading or caption,
the differing text should also take up a multiple of the basic leading. This
means that every diversion from the basic text size should take up mul-
tiples of 21 px. You can accomplish this by adjusting the line height and
margins accordingly.
   Let’s say you require your subheadings to be 18 px. In order that the
height of each line is 21 px, set your line-height to:

   21 ÷ 18 = 1.167
173   Applying vertical rhythm




      Using the same line height with the bigger text of a heading means the
      type will be set relatively tighter than the body text if the heading wraps.
      However, a bold heading wrapped over two lines will benefit rather than
      suffer from this.
          To keep the rhythm going you should adjust the margins above and
      below the heading to fit. Set the margins to 1.167 em, the same as the line
      height, so that they equal the full 21 px vertical rhythm unit. Don’t be tempted
      to use line-height to add significant white space around headings – if your heading
      wraps you will end up with what looks like two headings.

         h2 {
            font-size: 1.125rem;    /* 18px */
            line-height: 1.167;     /* 21px */
            margin-top: 1.167em;    /* 21px */
            margin-bottom: 1.167em; /* 21px */
         }

      You can also set asymmetrical margins for headings, provided the margins
      combine to be multiples of the basic line height. For instance, you could
      widen the space between a heading and the preceding content, and tighten
      the separation from the following text. In this example, the top and bottom
      margins are one and a half times and half the vertical rhythm respectively:

         h2 {
            font-size: 1.125rem;    /* 18px */
            line-height: 1.167;     /* 21px */
            margin-top: 1.75em;     /* 31.5px */
            margin-bottom: 0.583em; /* 10.5px */
         }

      Side notes and other supplementary material such as captions are often
      set at a smaller size to the basic text. To keep small text at the correct
      rhythm, use a calculation similar to that for headings. Let’s say your side
      notes are set at 14 px. Their line height must equal 21 px, so set your line
      height to 1.5:

         aside.note {
            font-size: 0.875rem; /* 14px */
            line-height: 1.5;    /* 21px */
         }
                                                                  Applying vertical rhythm       174




     Aboard Minerva off the Coast of New England
     Daniel is roused by a rooster on the forecastledeck† that is growing certain       † The forecastle deck is the
     it’s not just imagining that light in the eastern sky. Unfortunately the                short deck that, towards
     eastern sky is off to port this morning. Yesterday it was starboard. Minerva            the ship’s bow, is built
     has been sailing up and down the New England coast for the better part of               above the upperdeck.
     a fortnight, trying to catch a wind that will decisively take her out into deep
     water, or “off soundings,” as they say. They are probably not more than fifty
     miles away from Boston.


     Contrary Winds
     Daniel goes back and sits by one of the windows – these are undershot so
     that he can look straight down and see Minerva’s wake being born in a
     foamy collision around the rudder. He opens a small hatch below a window
     and drops out a Fahrenheit thermometer on a string. It is the very latest in
     temperature measurement from Europe – Enoch presented it to him as a
     sort of party favour. He lets it bounce through the surf for a few minutes,
     then hauls it in a takes a reading.


     He’s been trying to perform this ritual every four hours – the objective
     being to see if there’s any rumour that the North Atlantic is striped with
     currents of warm water.


Vertical rhythm maintained with headings and side notes.


Your side matter might actually be better off with a different line height
from the body text. Such a narrow measure warrants lines set closer
together; this way you will also minimise the risk of your body text and
marginalia being read as if they are a continuous line of text. If you reduce
the line height of your aside, you can still do so with respect to the overall
page rhythm. Decreasing the line height to 18 px, for example, will mean
the side matter rejoins the rhythm every seven lines. That will rarely make
a difference to your reader, unless it’s a particularly long side note, but it
does keep your typographic system thoughtful and intact.

Allow embedded media to break the rhythm
Illustrations, videos, tables, forms and other interruptions create syncopa-
tions and variations against the base rhythm of the page. These variations
can and should add life to your composition, but there is no particular
reason why the main text should return precisely in phase.
175   Applying vertical rhythm




      For that, you would need to crop images just so they fit the rhythm. Any
      attempt at responsive design would render this approach extremely dif-
      ficult, if not impossible – variable-width columns tend to lead to images
      with variable widths and heights. But, more to the point, the tail would
      wag the dog. Images which are content rather than decoration can be cropped,
      but only to convey the right message, not so they fit into a mathematical
      arrangement.
          Vertical rhythm is most apparent in running text. Interrupting that
      text with embedded media means you can simply restart the beat when
      the text recommences.

      Don’t slavishly follow a baseline grid
      The baseline is an imaginary line on which the letters in a font appear
      to rest. In the world of print design, the basic unit of vertical rhythm is
      measured from baseline to baseline, and blocks of text are arranged and
      aligned to baselines.
          The web is slightly different. In browsers, text is centred within a
      text block. You can adjust the text blocks precisely and accurately, but
      the browser knows very little about the baseline1, unlike software such as
      InDesign, which offers configurable settings, allowing us to force text back
      onto a baseline grid if it’s thrown off by an inserted element.
          To have all text sit on a common baseline in a browser takes an awful
      lot of jiggery-pokery2, but having little concept of a baseline does not pre-
      clude a page from having a vertical rhythm and the benefits one can pro-
      vide. The way web pages are laid out by browsers is like upside-down
      Tetris. Blocks stack downwards from the top of the page, and text fills
      those blocks. They are not built from the text outwards, which is why we
      don’t have an innate baseline grid to work with. Forcing all type to a base-
      line grid is to pretend the web is something it isn’t: that is, print. Vertical
      rhythm is not precisely the same as a baseline grid, but provides all the
      consistency and regular downward motion required for your reader.
          One exception is when you want to position blocks of differently sized
      text next to each other and have the baselines align. The alignment is not
      strictly necessary but can be more pleasing to the eye. Because text sits in


      1   CSS has an increasing number of ways to align baselines. All it had intially was
          vertical-align:baseline for sitting inline images on the baseline. More recently
          Flexbox and Grid Layout modules (http://wbtyp.net/7) have introduced ways to
          align adjacent blocks to baselines.
      2   Tom Bredin-Grey had much to consider and calculate when writing MegaType
          (http://wbtyp.net/68) as a baseline alignment project.
                                                      Applying vertical rhythm   176




the middle of a text block rather than on the baseline, you will normally
need to nudge one of the blocks up or down to get the alignment you crave.
   Baseline grids are, ultimately, most useful in print, and their traits
show up best with opposing pages, and when light shines through paper
as you are reading; the paper’s translucency reveals a shadow of the type
on the other side of the page. Aligning the text on both sides of the paper
prevents misaligned baselines distracting the reading experience. We don’t
have the same problem with screens.
177   Arrangement and composition




      Arrangement and
      composition

      Layout is intrinsically connected to typography. Not everything
      about layout has to do with the text, but as a typographer it is
      your task to organise and arrange the textual matter in such a
      way that your reader will understand how the different elements
      on a page relate to one another, so they will have a good chance
      of finding what is of interest to them.

      The field of typography concerned with layout is macrotypography. This
      incorporates many aspects of what is frequently called information design,
      as part of an overall user experience design. There are many fine books1
      written specifically about layout, most of which are far bigger than the one
      you are currently reading about type. This lone chapter cannot go into great
      detail about all aspects of layout, though it does cover important strategies
      for your overall page structure and composition.


      Design layouts from the content out
      In 1928, the German typographer Jan Tschichold, later to become chief
      designer at Penguin Books, published his seminal manifesto: Die neue
      Typographie 2. In it he wrote:

          Though largely forgotten today, methods and rules upon which it is impossible
          to improve have been developed for centuries. To produce perfect books these
          rules have to be brought to life.



      1   In particular, Grid Systems in Graphic Design by Josef Müller-Brockmann, and
          The Typographic Grid by Hans Rudolf Bosshard.
      2   The New Typography by Jan Tschichold (1995, after 1928 original).
                                                   Arrangement and composition   178




What Tschichold refers to are finely honed geometric systems that create
beautiful text for books and other printed publications. Binding content
to the physical form is what good book designers do; but with all paper-
based design, they start with paper. Paper that has edges, ratios that can
be repeated. A physical canvas. And that’s where Tschichold’s assertion
falls down. The ‘rules and methods upon which it is impossible to improve’
no longer apply. We’ve entered an era that must challenge the design and
layout theory that has existed for over 1,000 years. We have no predefined
canvas on which to paint our beautiful geometry – the outside-in approach
to layout no longer applies. Instead, we have content that we need to apply
to whatever canvas – that is, whatever screen – we are presented with by
our reader.
    As web designers we don’t have the opportunity to choose or know in
advance the canvas size or stock. Often we don’t even know the text or
imagery we are designing for. Somehow we have to set rules to lay out and
typeset unknown content in an unknown medium. For all the precision
that computers can provide, we have to make estimates, guesses, accom-
modations and compromises.
    The rules and methods Tschichold referred to are not entirely defunct,
but we need to re-evaluate them and apply what we can in our modern
fluid context where the medium is in the hands of the user (often, but not
always, literally). By applying rules of contrast, repetition, alignment and
proximity we can design from the content outwards, and use proportions
to have layouts that adapt themselves to their surroundings.

Adopt a mobile-first philosophy
Designing for small screens does not leave you much scope for layout. You
have only one dimension in which to set text: downwards. A single, narrow
column, which your reader perceives bit by bit as if peering through a key-
hole, is a challenging environment to design for, which is why it should be
considered up front. Because your reader cannot usually see much of the
page on a mobile device, and because the content is stacked rather than
arranged, success relies heavily on prioritisation and hierarchy.
    Thinking mobile first is a design philosophy, and a very useful one at
that. Being forced to consider a linear priority has the fortunate side effect
of benefitting all potential layouts. Your client can no longer get away with
saying one block is of equal importance to another – something has to
come first – and that’s exactly the kind of information you need to know
as a designer.
179   Arrangement and composition




      Think mobile first by having small screens at the forefront of your mind
      when designing, and consider the likes of desktop monitors as an enhance-
      ment. You or your colleagues may have a development process where you
      build mobile first, but thinking mobile first doesn’t have to mean design-
      ing mobile first. The two extremes need to coexist, so neither phone nor
      desktop (nor anything in between) should be an afterthought. All screens
      should be an intrinsic part of your design thinking and process.
         Avoid designing different layouts for specific devices: this is a Sisyphean
      task and will lull you into a false sense of security. Allow your designs to
      take on the shape of water; they should continuously adjust to the vessel
      into which they are poured. When layouts of elements break (hence break-
      point), adapt the design accordingly. This is true responsive design and
      provides the most flexible (in both senses) and long-lasting approach to
      design. For convenience and maintainability it is fine to group your adap-
      tations into batches at predictable sizes (small, medium, large, giant), but
      think about those from a modular point of view. You are enhancing layouts
      to better fit a vessel; you are not designing for a given device.


      Stage the main text block for scanning
      In ‘How we read’ we learned that people scan with purpose, jumping from
      section to section, looking for a particular piece of information. They skim
      read, casting their eye over text, reading words and sentences here and
      there to get a sense of the content. Ultimately (we hope), people read lin-
      early in an engaged manner once they find a passage or entire page they
      are interested in.
          Everything you’ve read so far in this book has been about the up-close
      detail of text and attention to the linear reading experience. When you sit
      back and consider a page as a designer, you move away from the lean-in
      typographic perspective and take on a graphic designer’s-eye view. The
      graphic designer’s role is to arrange text blocks, imagery and other ele-
      ments of the page in ways which make immediate sense to the beholder.
      Your job is to convert the visitor from a skimmer into a reader, but to do
      that you must accept that all potential readers will scan first, and design
      the page for that scenario.
          The way people scan is well documented and informative. On larger
      screens, people tend to scan with fixations forming an F-pattern3.


      3   ‘F-Shaped Pattern For Reading Web Content’ (http://wbtyp.net/25) by Jakob Nielsen
          on Nielsen-Norman Group (2006).
                                                    Arrangement and composition   180




Eye-tracking heatmap showing F-pattern reading.


At first they read in a horizontal movement; this would normally be the
main heading, standfirst or lede. This initial pass forms the top bar of the F.
    If the opening hasn’t grabbed their attention straight away, visitors
then move down the page and read in a second horizontal movement,
typically shorter than the initial movement. This forms the F’s middle bar.
    Finally, your visitors will work their way down the left side of the con-
tent in a vertical movement forming the stem of the F. Sometimes this
can be fairly slow and meticulous; other times users move faster, skipping
from chunk to chunk. This F-shaped behaviour leaves us with three con-
clusions to take into our design:

1. The overall reading experience must be as inviting as possible because
   it competes with the momentum of scanning.
2. Subheadings must be clearly demarcated and easy to latch on to.
3. There must be a clear left-hand edge, giving your visitors’ eyes a visual
   bannister to hold on to as they descend the page.

Bring the design into the margins
Margins frame the text block and provide a guide rail for your reader,
whether they are immersed in the text or scanning the page. When the
margins are sufficiently capacious you can use them to house side notes,
181   Arrangement and composition




      captions or pull-quotes, and as a means of placing images and tables which
      are wider than the measure of the body text.
         For example, you might have an article containing some paragraphs
      and an aside marked up simply like this:

         <article>
            <p>Text…</p>
            <aside>Note…</aside>
            <p>More text…</p>
         </article>

      You would start off with the text block centred nicely on the page, restricted
      in width to a comfortable measure:

         article {
            max-width: 38em;
            margin-left: auto;
            margin-right: auto;
         }

         aside {
            margin: 1em;
         }

      When there is insufficient room in the margins, the aside runs inline with
      the column. When the page is wide enough, you can float the aside into
      the margin. In this example we have a side note sized at 10 em wide, with
      1 em gutter between the aside and the text block, meaning the page needs
      to have an 11 em margin either side of the central column, leaving us with
      a minimum width of 60 em (38+11+11=60):

         @media only screen and (min-width: 60em) {
            aside {
         		width: 10em;
         		float: left;
         		margin-left: -11em;
         		margin-top: 0;
            }
         }
                                                   Arrangement and composition            182




For screens somewhere between the two extremes, you can situate the
aside halfway into the margin:

   @media only screen and (min-width: 49em) {
      aside {
   		width: 10em;
   		float: left;
   		margin-left: -5em;
   		margin-top: 0;
      }
   }




                                                    Top-left: Aside inline. Top-right: Aside fully in margin.
                                                    Bottom: Aside jutting out.



Use active white space
White space is the space between elements in a composition. White space
frames the content and provides structure to the page. White space is an
indispensable factor not only in giving the eye room to read, but also in
creating a welcoming environment. Without white space your page will
feel too cluttered (because it is).
    The practical value of white space towers over its value as a design                        White space doesn’t
element. A page with generous amounts of white space might look nicer,                          have to be white,
                                                                                                which is why it’s
but it’s not about taste; it’s a welcome side effect: the logical consequence                   also known as
of functional design.                                                                           negative space.
183   Arrangement and composition




      The spacing between words and lines – the result of competent typesetting –
      is known as passive white space. When you use white space to frame text
      blocks, highlight elements and lead your reader from one aspect to another,
      it’s called active white space.
           Use active white space to surround your text with enough air to breathe.
      This reduces stress levels when there are other elements on the page, as it
      makes it much easier for your reader to focus on the core content.
          The more white space you surround an element with, the greater the
      emphasis you give it. In the previous example we indented the aside. The
      spacing we gave it – the active white space – reduced its impact on the text
      block as a downward reading experience, but also distinctly separated the
      note from the surrounding prose.
          Adjust the spacing within the text block using typographic increments,
      but rely on free proportions to adjust the empty space. In other words, use
      ems to set margins in running text, but use percentages or viewport units
      to tie the surrounding white space and overall layout to the dimensions
      and proportions of the browser window (see ‘Headlines and impact’ for
      more details on viewport units).


      Show relationships and draw attention
      The sparsest of content can be simply accommodated in a block in the
      middle of the screen, or perhaps positioned to the left, comfortably offset
      from the edge of the browser window. Pages with more forms of con-
      tent will need additional consideration. On a small screen your main text
      block will be preceded, interrupted or followed by ancillary accompani-
      ments such as asides, imagery, data visualisation, notes, related links and
      advertising. For larger screens these are blocks of content floating around
      waiting for a home.
          Any subsidiary and supporting elements will need to be placed in con-
      text, grabbing just the right amount of attention, and associating them-
      selves with the right neighbours. All this can be achieved through the
      application of some gestalt principles.
          The German word Gestalt can be translated as shape or form, and the
      term refers to how visual input is perceived by human beings. Our view
      of one thing can be altered by the things around it. Once we see the whole,
      our perception of the individual parts changes. Conversely, once we can see
      all the parts, our understanding of the whole is altered. This is what gestalt
      theorists call field theory. The field is the holistic view of the world, or, in
      this case, the full design. In gestalt theory, you get to the best outcomes
                                                    Arrangement and composition   184




by adjusting all the attributes in the field and not worrying about an indi-
vidual one. The whole is not greater than the sum of the parts, it is other
than the sum of the parts.
   In active white space we have already come across one of the gestalt
principles: proximity.




Proximity.


When you position elements close to one another, they are seen as part
of a group rather than as individual elements. This is an obvious way to
associate one thing with another; for example, placing a side note next to
the text it supplements.
   The opposite effect is useful too. By increasing the spacing around an
element you decrease the proximity to its neighbours, setting it apart con-
textually and emphatically.




Similarity.


Another principle is similarity. Elements sharing similar characteristics are
perceived as more related than elements that don’t share those characteristics.
   Any number of characteristics can be similar: color, shape, size, tex-
ture, and so on. When your reader sees these similar characteristics, they
185   Arrangement and composition




      perceive the elements as being related. Links the same colour will have the
      same meaning (unvisited, visited). Headings the same size will be at the
      same level in the hierarchy. All small text in a sans serif will be deemed
      related; and small text in a serif will be assumed to be related but different
      to a sans.




      Focal points.


      A variation on similarity is focal points, as they can’t be seen without
      the presence of similarity among nearby elements. Elements with a point
      of interest, emphasis or difference will capture your reader’s attention.
      A classic focal point would be a dropped cap. Other examples include a
      thumbnail image, icon, or symbol, such as a manicule      , section §, orna-
      mental quote or fleuron . Any small device which draws attention is a
      focal point, bearing in mind that many such devices on one page compete
      with one another and revert to similarity rather than focus.




      Common regions.


      Elements are perceived as part of a group if they are located within the
      same closed region. Drawing a line around things groups them together.
      Placing the elements on a different background colour will also work.
                                                           Arrangement and composition   186




Like all of the gestalt principles, this seems obvious, but by thinking
about them consciously and with reference to the whole page you can
come up with variations and options which offer more effective solutions
when considered together. For example, you may have a white page and
group together some related links on a darker background. The colour
may clash with or confuse some imagery on the page, in which case a
solution might be to keep the related links white but make the rest of the
page darker. Alternatively, changing the colour and typeface of the links
would be a different way to group them together if background colour
proved problematic.


Grids
Hierarchy lets you outline your typography; gestalt principles enable you
to group and relate elements. Grids help you organise and arrange your
content. They give you a structure on which to hang your content, and a
consistent way to expose the information system to your reader.
    One thing grids are not is rigid. Overlaid on a design they can look and
feel like prison bars, but grids are not jail cells waiting for content, with
a framework regime telling content where to go. A grid is a collection of
well-organised possibilities.

Types of grid
There are essentially three types of grid: hierarchical, columnar and modular.




Left to right: Hierarchical, columnar and modular grids.


Hierarchical grids organise disparate content by grouping it in horizon-
tal modules stacked vertically one after the other. They are simple and
extremely flexible as they have no limitations on the length (height)
of each element. Hierarchical grids require very little horizontal space
187   Arrangement and composition




      besides a comfortable measure, so they are ideally suited to small screens.
      The downside is that relationships between the groupings are limited to
      a linear hierarchy.
          Columnar grids consist of vertical columns spaced predictably across a
      page. You can use them to situate different types of content next to each
      other, such as related links, imagery or advertising alongside an article.
      You can also design your text block to span multiple columns, and use
      the column grid to place content within the text block, or alongside it at
      strategic points.




      Columnar grid with sidebars and inset block.


      Modular grids are similar to columnar grids, with the addition of rows
      placed at regular intervals to create a matrix of modules across and down
      the page. Modules can contain individual units of content, or can be com-
      bined in multiple ways, from a few simple rectangles to layouts resembling
      a game of Scrabble. Modular grids provide both precision and flexibility,
      enabling you to be simultaneously creative and systematic. Their draw-
      back is that they rely very much on an outside-in, canvas-first approach.
          Complex modular grids are rarely applicable to the web, as their effec-
      tiveness lies in the reader being able to perceive the entire grid and make
      associations between elements based on their dimensions and juxtaposi-
      tion. True modular grids require knowledge and control of text size, screen
                                                   Arrangement and composition   188




dimensions, and the content itself so that the modules are rendered and
populated as intended. Web pages are filled with content from the top
downwards; modular grids require that content is placed precisely on its
two-dimensional lattice. All of these factors compete with the require-
ments of responsive design.

Use compound grids for maximum flexibility
An ideal compromise which addresses the downsides of modular grids is
the compound grid. Compound grids are created by combining hierarchical
grids and columnar grids. You can do this in two ways: first, start with a
columnar grid and give each column its own hierarchical grid, grouping
and dividing the content as you go down the column; or second, start with
a hierarchical grid and give each element of the hierarchy a columnar grid.




Compound hierarchical / columnar grid.


The latter approach is particularly flexible as you can use a different colum-
nar grid for each element of the hierarchy, choosing whatever is most
appropriate to the content. Both approaches will adapt themselves well to
your reader’s preferences, screen dimensions and unknown content poured
out of a database.
189   Arrangement and composition




      Choose odd over even grid systems
      Many grids on the web, particularly those used by CSS frameworks, are
      based on even numbers of equally sized columns. Grids do not require uni-
      formity – their job is to provide consistency, not monotonous regularity.
      You could create a simple asymmetrical grid based on the golden ratio,
      with each column 1.618 times smaller than the previous one. Or you could
      instead have decreasing column sizes based on a ratio of 1:√2, with each
      column a factor of 1.414 narrower than its neighbour.




      Asymmetrical grid based on golden ratio.


      You could also choose to have a column sized specifically for advertising,
      with adjacent columns flexibly holding content with a readable line-length.
      A grid system can make your work as a designer easier, but always choose
      your grid by what works best for the content and your reader, not your own
      personal convenience. The even number of columns dished up by most
      grid frameworks on the web is a consequence of mathematics, not design.
      That the grids are divisible by 12 (and 6, 4, 3, 2) is espoused as a virtue, but
      it has nothing to do with the needs of your content, and everything to do
      with the desire to provide a generic system.
          If you were to research the kinds of grids in use across all media, you
      would find that an odd number of columns is the norm. Newspapers in
      particular tend to use either five or seven columns. An even number of
      columns is stable, but an odd number of columns provides a useful ten-
      sion which you can use to readily imply hierarchy and lead your reader’s
      eye around a layout.
          The CSS Grid Layout4 module will go some way to addressing some of
      the limitations of modular grids, adapting its advantages to a responsive
      design context, but the canvas-based nature of modular grids with fixed
      columns and rows will always be problematic on the web.


      4   For a great introduction, read Get Ready for CSS Grid Layout (http://wbtyp.net/149) by
          Rachel Andrew.
                                                   Arrangement and composition   190




Restrict column length to the viewport height
You can use CSS columns to span short passages of text across a page. This
can be a useful way to to present introductory or supplementary text in a
compact manner while restricting the measure to a readable width.
   You can set columns on any block-level element such as a paragraph.
You can also use them for multiple elements by targeting their parent,
such as a <div> or <article>. Declare columns by specifying the mini-
mum column width using column-width:

   article {
      column-width: 10em;
   }

In this instance, browsers will render the <article> element with as many
columns as it can fit, provided the columns are no narrower than 10 em.
If your article element is 15 em wide, the text will be rendered in a single
column with a width of 15 em. If the article is 22 em wide, there will be two
columns, each 11 em wide.
    You can also turn on column layout by specifying the number of col-
umns using column-count:

   article {
      column-count: 3;
   }

This will lay out text in three columns regardless of how wide or narrow
they need to be to fit the available width. This gives you much less
control over the readability of text. If you combine column-count with
column-width then column-count becomes the maximum number of col-
umns, and column-width is the minimum width for those columns, giving
you a little more control over your column layout.
   You can also specify the gutter between columns using column-gap,
and insert a border between columns using column-rule:

   article {
      column-count: 3;
      column-width: 10em;
      column-gap: 1.5em;
      column-rule: 1px dotted #ddd;
   }
                  191     Arrangement and composition




 In the embellishment or                    into the realm of fantasy. For         typographer can ﬁnd: dangerous
 decoration of a message, there             this reason the ornamentation          because all matters of decoration
 lies the opportunity for the little        of printing is at once the most        call upon the utmost discretion
 added touch that goes far beyond           charming and the most                  and sense of ﬁtness for their
 the bare essentials of taste and           dangerous diversion the                eﬀective use.


 In the embellishment or decoration of         is at once the most charming and
 a message, there lies the opportunity         the most dangerous diversion the
 for the little added touch that goes far      typographer can ﬁnd: dangerous
 beyond the bare essentials of taste           because all matters of decoration call
 and into the realm of fantasy. For this       upon the utmost discretion and sense
 reason the ornamentation of printing          of ﬁtness for their eﬀective use.



In the embellishment or decoration of a
message, there lies the opportunity for the little
added touch that goes far beyond the bare
essentials of taste and into the realm of fantasy.
For this reason the ornamentation of printing is
at once the most charming and the most
dangerous diversion the typographer can ﬁnd:
dangerous because all matters of decoration call
upon the utmost discretion and sense of ﬁtness
for their eﬀective use.

                          Columns automatically adjust to viewport width.


                         CSS columns set with column-width are inherently responsive from a
                         viewport width perspective. However, if your column extends beyond the
                         viewport then your reader will need to scroll back up to follow the columns,
                         interrupting the flow with an awkward manual intervention. If you know
                         how much text you are setting in columns, work around this limitation
                         using a vertical media query which turns on columns only when there is
                         enough room to show the whole column.

                              @media (min-height: 25em) {
                                 article {
                              		columns: 3 10em;
                              		column-gap: 1.5em;
                              		column-rule: 1px dotted #ddd;
                                 }
                              }

                          You will need to experiment to see what your minimum height require-
                          ment is.
Arrangement and composition   192
3 Choosing and
   Using Fonts




 • How fonts render on screens
 • Practical and pragmatic considerations
 • Knowing and browsing type
 • Selecting typefaces for body text
 • Selecting typefaces for display text
 • Selecting typefaces for functional text
 • Combining typefaces
 • Using web fonts
 • Building a library
¶ The typeface shouldn’t be the design;
    it should serve the typesetting.
  Your choice of typeface is decided
   only when you know the precise
        requirements of the job.
195   How fonts render on screens




      How fonts render
      on screens

      Screens are crude, hostile places for words to live and breathe. Their
      emitted light1 is tiring compared to the reflected light of paper.
      Resolutions are often dismally low compared with print. Device
      dimensions are disparate and unpredictable, and the appearance
      of text varies significantly from system to system.

      These factors are why it is important for us to pay as much attention as
      possible to typography on the web. When text is crudely rendered, it is not
      an inherently comfortable place for our readers to be. They naturally scan
      the page, sweeping across it as an astronomer might observe the sky, paus-
      ing occasionally to study small details. We need to do everything in our
      power to overcome the obstacles to reading, and that means understanding
      how letterforms end up represented on the screen.


      Accept the limits of screen resolution
      The majority of the text we see around us, whether in print or on screens,
      is comprised of dots of various colours, shapes and sizes. Digital printers
      squirt or stick tiny drops of ink. Screens radiate the tiny on-or-off points
      of light we know as pixels.
          When we talk about resolution, we’re describing how many dots are
      present in any given area. When it comes to screens, the dots in question
      are pixels so we more correctly describe screen resolutions in terms of
      pixels per inch (ppi), as opposed to dots per inch (dpi), which should be
      reserved for print. Many screens, especially laptops and desktops, have
      a resolution of around 140 ppi. High-resolution devices such as Apple’s
      Retina screens have less than 400 ppi. Compare this with the 600 dpi

      1   Except for some e-ink devices such as Kindles.
                                                      How fonts render on screens   196




resolution of a budget laser printer, or professional digital typesetting
at 2,438 dpi.
    One square inch of a 140 ppi screen contains 19,600 pixels. One square
inch of ink from a cheap laser printer will comprise 360,000 dots – eigh-
teen times as many as the screen, and four times as many as a Retina display.
The more dots or pixels available, the less they are individually perceptible,
and the greater the detail, sharpness and tonal range. Resolution matters,
but there’s nothing we can do about it.


Understand how fonts render on screens
Digital fonts are designed and stored as vectors: mathematical formulas              TrueType and
 describing perfect lines and curves. Screens, however, are made up of pixels;       PostScript fonts
                                                                                     use quadratic and
at some point, the font file’s vectors need to be turned into dots to be drawn       cubic Bézier curves
– or rendered – on a screen. This is a process called rasterisation.                 respectively.
    Rasterisation is inherently lossy. Consequently, letterforms can be dis-
 torted or even made illegible when converted into groups of pixels. It is
also subjective. Different settings on different text rendering engines will
 rasterise the font files with varying degrees of success and significantly
 different matrices of pixels for the same letterforms.
    Each operating system contains a text rendering engine (sometimes
 more than one) and each web browser controls which rendering engine is
 used. This means that on the same operating system, two browsers can pro-
 duce text with very different appearances. Choice of text rendering engine
and its settings can also vary between versions of an OS and between brow-
 ser releases. On top of that, users can tweak some of the rasterisation set-
 tings in browsers and operating systems.

Introducing anti-aliasing
Assuming we require black text on a white background, the simplest way
to rasterise a letter is to make a pixel black whenever the centre of the pixel
falls inside the outline. Aligning letterforms to the pixel grid in this manner
gives you aliased text. The downside of this simplistic approach shows itself
when part of the letter accidentally catches too many pixels: the characters
can become blobby and ugly. Worse still, if the shape catches too few pixels
the letterform can become illegible.
197   How fonts render on screens




      Aliasing can result in lopsided characters like this 11 px o.


      A way to mitigate the unevenness of aliased text is greyscale smoothing, a
      form of anti-aliasing. With this method, whenever part of a pixel falls inside
      the outline it is turned a shade of grey. The more of the pixel that is inside
      the outline, the darker the shade of grey. Pixels entirely inside the outline
      are turned black.
          The pixels in liquid-crystal (LCD) and organic light-emitting diode (OLED)
      displays are made up of red, green and blue stripes known as subpixels. By
      altering the brightness of each colour within the pixel, subpixel anti-alias-
      ing can be achieved, increasing the apparent resolution of the screen and
      sharpening the text.




      L–R: Vector, aliased, greyscale smoothing, subpixel anti-aliasing.


      On close inspection, greyscale smoothing is always blurrier than subpixel
      anti-aliased text. This is not a matter of opinion – it’s how the rendering
      works. Subpixel anti-aliasing uses each of the three individual subpixels in
      every pixel of the screen to smooth out and sharpen the edges of the font.
      Greyscale smoothing relies on whole pixels only, which effectively reduces
                                                                How fonts render on screens   198




its smoothing sharpness by three times. That said, subpixel anti-aliasing
comes with downsides. On lower-resolution screens there can be visible
colour fringes and a slight emboldening of letterforms, but these are a worth-
while compromise for sharper text.

Enter hinting
As we’ve seen, mapping vectors onto pixels can be problematic. This is espe-
cially true for black and white rasterisation, but also an issue for greyscale
and subpixel anti-aliasing. This is where hinting steps in. TrueType hinting
provides additional instructions which bend the contours of the letterform
into a slightly different shape, so that the pixelated letterform, once raster-
ised, represents a more legible character.
   Steps involved in programming hinting instructions include snapping
the outline to the pixel grid, ensuring the stem weights (thickness of the
vertical lines) are consistent within a letterform, across the alphabet, and
representative of the original design.




Hinting instructions adjust the design to fit the pixel grid.


Hinting is done on a character-by-character basis for many different text
sizes. If this sounds like a rather tedious, time-consuming activity, that’s
because it is. It can take an experienced hinter around 80 hours to fully hint
a single font with the basic 256-character set.
    Most computer users think of Verdana, Georgia, Arial and other core
web fonts as free, but in reality Verdana is probably the most expensive,
labour-intensive font ever produced. It includes characters used to write
an extremely wide range of languages, and each of these characters had
to be adjusted to be readable at every point size between 9 px and 60 px.
199   How fonts render on screens




      In other words, each of more than 890 characters was effectively redesigned
      dozens of times for black and white aliasing, and again for greyscale and
      subpixel anti-aliasing.

      Autohinting to the rescue
      It is possible to hint fonts using an automated process. Most web fonts
      will be provided autohinted because full manual hinting is so expensive.
      Autohinting is far more successful for anti-aliased fonts than for black and
      white rendering, and is much better than no hinting at all. In the words of
      type designer and engineer Tim Ahrens2:

          In hinting, like with many things in the world, initial improvements can
          be achieved quickly and without too much effort but as you get closer to
          perfection the effort that is necessary to achieve improvements increases. […]
          Spending a few hours setting manual hints fixes most remaining problems
          [after autohinting] but if you want really perfect rendering you can spend
          much more time, virtually without any upper limit. Thinking of Verdana as
          an extreme example, where the hinting probably took weeks or months.


      Accept rendering differences between platforms
      We’ve seen there is more than one way to turn a font from vectors in a file to
      pixels on a screen, and within those methods there are settings, tweaks and
      tuning that can be applied by both font engineer and your reader. There are
      also philosophical differences of opinion between platforms and operating
      systems, in particular between Microsoft and the rest of the world. These are:

      • Only Windows uses hinting. No other operating system (including iOS,
        macOS, Android and Linux) makes uses of hints.
      • Handheld devices (including iOS and Android devices) use greyscale
        smoothing rather than subpixel anti-aliasing. This is because physical
        subpixels are aligned in a row, so the antialiasing doesn’t work well when
        rotated. Windows-based mobile devices combine greyscale smoothing
        with hinting.
      • LCD and OLED desktops, laptops and other screens whose orientation can
        be predicted use subpixel anti-aliasing by default. Windows machines
        combine subpixel anti-aliasing with hinting.


      2   In a reply to a comment on ‘A closer look at TrueType hinting’ (http://wbtyp.net/4)
          on the Typekit blog.
                                                                    How fonts render on screens   200




Microsoft’s stance is to opt for clarity over accuracy. Using hinting, Micro-
soft’s DirectWrite rasteriser tries to align characters to the whole pixel grid,
with the result that regular weights can look lighter, bold weights can look
heavier, and subtle details of design can be lost at small type sizes. Apple
and others prefer to preserve the design of the typeface as much as possible.
Apple’s Core Text rasteriser tries to present text as close to the original vec-
tors as possible, sometimes at the cost of image clarity. The result on lower-
resolution screens (<200 ppi) is that Windows users get sharper, less blurry
text and everyone else gets accurate but fuzzier renditions. This can be frus-
trating for those of us used to one system or another, but in the words3 of
type designer Christian Schwartz, ‘Our goal should be to make everything
look good but not the same. After all, a typeface looks different on coated
and uncoated paper.’
    We are entering a period of digital divide: the haves and have nots of
font performance on screen. Lower-resolution screens provide fewer pixels
with which to render text, poorly engineered fonts are more problematic,
and the subjectivities of rasterisation are more apparent.
    Conversely, with high-resolution screens, text rendering converges.
More pixels means clarity catches up with accuracy, rasterisation opinion
becomes a moot point, and consistency wins out.




Text rendering on hi-res screens differs little. Top: Windows. Bottom: macOS.


It is clear that one day font hinting will become obsolete. It is not used on
mobile devices, which now account for over half of all internet usage, and
is far less necessary on high-resolution screens. As of now, however, hint-
ing is still important and will remain so for as long as Microsoft embraces
hinting and a significant number of people use Windows machines with
lower-resolution displays; that may be the case for at least another decade.



3   At Ampersand NYC conference (http://wbtyp.net/150) on 2 November 2013.
                        201   How fonts render on screens




                              Nonetheless, type designers are agreed4 that situations calling for exten-
                              sive manual hinting are fewer. In most situations they would prefer to
                              autohint, then manually tune the exceptions that slipped through the
                              autohinter’s net.

                              Don’t disable subpixel rendering except when text is
                              reversed out
 Windows machines,            Subpixel anti-aliasing has one major drawback on lower-resolution macOS
mobiles and high-res          screens. When text is reversed out (that is, light text on a dark background),
  screens suffer less
          from this.          it often renders far more heavily than dark on light. The issue is exacer-
                              bated with large text, which can sometimes seem an entire weight bolder.




                              Left/right: Subpixel/greyscale rendering. Top/bottom: High-res/low-res screen.


                              You can force browsers in these circumstances to use greyscale smoothing
                              instead of subpixel anti-aliasing by using a couple of proprietary properties:

                                  h1 {
                                     background: #000;
                                     color: #fff;
                                     -webkit-font-smoothing: antialiased;
                                     -moz-osx-font-smoothing: grayscale;
                                  }

                              Use these properties sparingly. Subpixel anti-aliasing gives a superior read-
                              ing experience to greyscale smoothing, so only turn it off when you are
                              reversing out text, and preferably only with larger text. For body text, allow
                              the differences to exist.



                              4   See discussion ‘Is type hinting for screens still relevant?’ (http://wbtyp.net/33)
                                  on TypeDrawers.
                                                       How fonts render on screens   202




Check your type across platforms
As the majority of screens gradually move to high resolutions, we’ll stop
talking about quality of rendering and go back to talking about the type
design itself. In the meantime, your duty to your readers is to check the
rendering of your chosen fonts across platforms and browsers. Some fonts
rasterise far better than others, and it’s not just a case of aesthetics. Poorly
designed, unhinted and badly hinted fonts can make the difference between
legible and unusable text.
   Test early and often. If you live and work on a Mac, invest in a Windows
machine for testing. A cheap laptop will be ideal, especially one with a lower-
resolution screen to better expose the frailties in fonts.

   Print designers who gauge their work on the screen, and web designers who
   gauge their work exclusively on their own machines, are arrogant in their
   disregard for the reader.
                            — Dean Allen in ‘Reading Design’ on A List Apart


As with all web design, don’t expect rendering to be the same across devices.
Assess whether something is just different or degraded based on a choice
you have made. Even if your readers use multiple devices – a PC at work,
an iPad at home, an Android smartphone – they won’t be comparing them
side by side and will be used to the vagaries of their machines. Ask your-
self: is the reader experience harmed or will your reader think something is
broken? From a typographical perspective, can they still read comfortably
and does the type do what is required of it, emotionally and structurally? If
the answer is still no, then there’s very little you can do other than choose
a different font.
203   Practical and pragmatic considerations




      Practical and
      pragmatic
      considerations

      For many designers the highlight of their process is choosing
      typefaces. It’s an absorbing, enlightening, intellectual and joyful
      undertaking, and one which you should tackle as a designer, not
      as an artist or a scholar. Your role is to choose fonts which fit the
      requirements and constraints of your brief. Before you embark
      on the process of choosing a typeface to subjectively match the
      voice, message and feel required by the text, ensure you address
      the objective needs of the project.

      It is acceptable to choose a typeface that you know inside out, provided it
      supports all the practical considerations of the text. It also fine to choose a
      brand new typeface you’ve been itching to try out, again provided it meets
      all the pragmatic criteria. Your primary obligation as a typographer choos-
      ing typefaces is to ensure your final choices are not wrong for the job at
      hand. Do that, and what you’re left with is subjective opinion of how right
      the ultimate decision is. If the objective needs have been met, and your
      client is happy with the final choice, then you can be content with a job
      well done.


      Don’t jump straight into choosing fonts
      Avoid making typeface choices at the beginning of the project. Spend time
      setting the typographic direction of the design first. You need this to give
      you a clearer idea of the contexts and situations in which the typefaces
      will be used.
                                            Practical and pragmatic considerations   204




Your final choice of fonts will depend on specific requirements, context,
constraints, confidence and, finally, taste. The first stage in reaching a
decision is to create a list of viable candidates that you then whittle down.
All the fonts in your list should do what you need them to do from a prac-
tical point of view. There’s no point shortlisting a typeface which will not
do the job required of it. Consider the pragmatic requirements before you
start making any aesthetic or emotional judgements.


Understand the purpose and requirements
Ensure you have a complete overview of what the fonts will need to do. A
great landscape gardener will know the contours they are working with.
They will know the shapes they are forming, the shadows they wish to cast,
the colours and textures they want to create. Only once these criteria are
known can they then decide which plants to situate and where.
    Understand the nature of the website you are designing. Think about
its future. Might the small project you are working on end up much bigger?
You could need more complex functionality and features in the future. Be
clear about the general purpose of the fonts you are choosing. Are they
required for immersive reading or merely scanning? Do you need to style
many interface elements, such as navigation, labels and form controls? Is
there much microcopy such as notes, notifications, alerts and captions?
What about small print or tabular data? Are you setting display text to be
looked at rather than read?

Use a typeface with the necessary characters
 Once you have understood the general purpose for the font, your first cri-
 terion is to work out which characters – letters, accents and punctuation
– are required. It stands to reason that your chosen font should contain the
 characters needed to form the words and sentences the writer composes.
This sounds obvious, and yet so often we see this, recreated from a British
 national newspaper website:




Mixing typefaces due to missing glyphs.
205   Practical and pragmatic considerations




      In this case, Cesc Fàbregas is the name of an internationally famous Span-
      ish footballer, at the time of writing playing in the English Premier League.
      The Catalan à in his name has been rendered in a different typeface, caus-
      ing it to stand out like an intrepid traveller among locals in a foreign bar.
      This, despite Fàbregas appearing in the newspaper’s football coverage on
      a weekly basis.
          It’s worth understanding what is happening here. When a browser ren-
      ders text it looks at each character individually. It then iterates through
      the list of typefaces in the font-family stack until it finds an available
      font that contains a glyph for the character to be rendered. In this case, the
      first choice font did not contain an à, but a different font further down the
      chain did. This is the web’s way to allow for differences in available fonts
      across platforms and for differences in the range of characters supported
      by individual fonts.
          Specify typefaces suitable for all the languages you are setting. Be aware
      that some topics (such as football or chemistry) may include glyphs that
      are not in the primary language of the text. Perhaps you need to set some
      official German writing and require an eszett as in Haßfurt, or you might
      need a Turkish dotless i, as in Fırat Üniversitesi.
          Free fonts will often lack important accents and other characters such as
      currency symbols and less common punctuation marks. Test with an exam-
      ple text. Any good font service or foundry will let you try before you buy.

      Make sure your typeface has the requisite styles
      Your design scheme may require a number of different styles of your chosen
      typeface: a regular weight for reading; an italic for quotations and empha-
      sis; a bold for headings. Maybe your hierarchy system requires a semibold
      for some or all of its headings. You may want your display text to be ren-
      dered in a huge ultralight setting.
          You might have requirements for specific text to fit in a given region,
      or have limited room for captions. In both cases, a condensed version of
      the typeface might be required.
          It’s not unusual for font families to come with only one width and four
      styles (bold and italic). Some typefaces have even fewer than four. John
      Baskerville didn’t cut bold fonts for his eponymous typeface, so faithfully
      revived Baskervilles come with an italic, but no bold.
          Some other fonts have regular, bold and italic but no bold italic, it being
      seen as an unnecessary evil of the digital age. Premiéra, designed in 2009
      by Thomas Gabriel, and used throughout this book, is one of those with-
      out a bold italic.
                                            Practical and pragmatic considerations   206




Choose fonts with the features and special effects
you require
Study the OpenType features available in the fonts you are considering. Do
they have any at all? Many free fonts don’t. If you’re designing text that
asks for subtle typography with a hint of tradition you might look for the
presence of small caps, historical ligatures and old-style numerals.
    Will the content contain many tables of data? If so, you’ll probably need
tabular lining numerals on hand. What about scientific notation? Do you
require proper superscripts, subscripts and mathematical symbols?
   Are you going for a friendly, inviting, maybe child-friendly appearance?
Perhaps a font’s standard double-storey a and g are available as single-sto-
rey alternates.
    What about fancy swashes, discretionary ligatures and other ornaments
to lift a font from ordinary to remarkable, and lend your display text a
unique and striking air of confidence?


Consider your fonts’ performance
You need to ask yourself how you want the fonts to perform from a techni-
cal perspective. Are there particular devices or operating systems used by
your readers? Is their internet connection particularly slow or unreliable?

Rendering
In ‘How fonts render on screens’ we discussed how fonts render differ-
ently on different machines and platforms. You’ll need to test your short-
listed fonts on targeted devices to ensure the text rendering is of a suitable
standard.

File size
Download speed is important to everyone, even in this age of supposedly
fast connections and ubiquitous broadband coverage (something far from
the truth in Europe and North America, let alone the rest of the world). But
performance matters more in some projects than others. Be aware of the
limitations and expectations your readers might have before you bombard
them with half a dozen or more 100 Kb font files chock full of massive
character sets, hinting, kerning and OpenType features.
    Users of web apps might be better served with judicious use of web
fonts, whereas readers of magazines and immersive experiences may have
a little more patience.
207   Practical and pragmatic considerations




      Don’t let the drive for performance lead you down the road of faux bolds
      for the sake of not downloading a bold font file. If performance is that
      crucial, think of a design solution that doesn’t require a bold. Your readers
      may not know that they are faced with a faux bold but they’ll feel it inside.
      See ‘Using web fonts’ for more details on a addressing web font file size.


      Work within your means, but be wary of free
      A key consideration for any font shortlist is budget. Has the project or client
      set aside money for investment in web fonts? If not, can you persuade them
      or absorb it in your day rate?
          With few notable exceptions, good type costs money. Quality typefaces
      take a significant amount of time to design, finesse and engineer, regard-
      less of whether they are subsequently given away or bundled with operat-
      ing systems and software.
          Some free fonts are very good, and come fully equipped with sizeable
      character sets and features. Source Serif, Open Sans, Lato, Clear Sans, Mer-
      riweather, Fira, Overpass and Alegreya all come to mind. Most free fonts
      are limited so it’s important to find out what they are missing and not to
      push beyond their limitations. Free or cheap typefaces will require more
      effort to bend them to your requirements.

      Licensing
      There are different models for licensing fonts. Put simply, they are either
      free, available to buy for a one-off self-hosting fee, or rented through a ser-
      vice. Prices often depend on usage measured by page views or bandwidth.
          If your company or client has a subscription to a web font service you
      may need to limit your search to that service, although most do have thou-
      sands of typefaces available to choose from. If you’re not tied to a service
      then you can self-host fonts; your choice can be wider as most foundries
      have self-hosting options available. Many also offer their fonts through a
      web font service. But some still choose one option or the other, confusing
      the landscape further.
          Not all typefaces are yet available as web fonts. Buying a desktop font
      and converting it to a web font is easy, but the chances are you would be
      breaking the licence agreement. In these situations, contact the font foundry
      to see if a solution can be found.
                                            Practical and pragmatic considerations   208




Be pragmatic in the face of branding
requirements
You might work for a company or client which has a brand font they would
ideally like to incorporate into your design. You will need to ask yourself
whether the brand font is suitable for all the practical purposes we’ve dis-
cussed so far. If not, can you use an alternative typeface that is perhaps
consistent with or complementary to the brand? If the specified typeface
is not suitable as a text font, can you use the brand font just for headings
and pair it with something else more appropriate?
    Sometimes a typeface was bought at some point in the distant past and
is still in common use. You may be free to use something completely dif-
ferent, but you could always take on the challenge of using the incumbent
fonts and use them in a different way. Remember typography is less about
the typeface and more about what you do with it – it’s still possible to cook
a fine dish with basic ingredients.
209   Knowing and browsing type




      Knowing and
      browsing type

      Learning to scrutinise and describe a typeface’s nuances means
      you will be better equipped to discuss your choices with col-
      leagues and clients. If you are able to get a client to articulate the
      feel or requirements of a font, you can apply your understanding
      of type to narrow down the selection effectively.

      Why might you want to use a typeface like Avenir? What makes Avenir
      different from other sans serifs like Helvetica or Gill Sans? If you want a
      typeface similar to Avenir, how do you track one down? To answer ques-
      tions like these you need to know type, and that means understanding the
      varieties, features and history of fonts. There are tens of thousands of pro-
      fessional typefaces to choose from, but only twenty-six letters in the alpha-
      bet. It stands to reason that, like so much in typography, the differences
      are usually subtle, but nonetheless visible if you know what to look for.
      Being able to describe and distinguish type will help you make informed
      decisions and navigate the different ways font vendors organise typefaces.


      Typeface anatomy
      I’ve tried to avoid excessive typographic jargon in this book, but when
      describing the fine details of any discipline, a certain amount of specific
      terminology becomes necessary. Features are illustrated on page 211.

      Strokes and shapes
      All characters, letters, numbers and punctuation are formed from a com-
      bination of straight and curved lines known as strokes, a term derived
      directly from the stroke of a pen. The way a stroke is formed is fundamental
      to the nature of a typeface. Knowing the terminology of different stroke
      forms is essential to effectively understand and describe a type design.
                                                        Knowing and browsing type   210




Axis and stress. If you imagine that a glyph was drawn with a broad-
nibbed pen, then the axis of a letterform is an imaginary line drawn from
top to bottom giving an indication of the angle at which the pen was held.
This angle is known as the stress. The stress is often – but not always – the
same through all the characters in a typeface, and will usually be vertical
or back-slanted to some degree.
    The easiest way to determine the stress axis is to look closely at the
letter O. Identify whether the bottom-left is thicker than the top-left, and
the top-right is thicker than the bottom-right: if a difference exists, then
the letter has diagonal stress. If the top and bottom of the O are a mirror
image of each other, but with the sides thicker, then the letter has vertical
stress. If the top and bottom of the O are the same thickness as the sides,
there is neither contrast nor stress.

Contrast and modulation. Contrast is the degree of difference between
the thick and thin strokes in a glyph. High contrast means there is a big
difference between thick and thin strokes. No contrast at all, so all strokes
are the same width, is often called monoline.
    Modulation is the way the contrast changes within a glyph. A modulated
stroke usually implies that the thickness varies predictably and smoothly
with the direction the imaginary pen is moving. Abrupt modulation means
that the stoke changes from thick to thin quickly.

Baseline. An imaginary line on which the letters in a font appear to rest.

Cap height. The distance from the baseline to the top of the uppercase
letters (not including accents or diacritics). This is often slightly lower
than the height of the tallest lowercase letters.

 X-height. The height of the lowercase letters. While x-height does not spe-
 cifically refer to the height of a letter x, the two are usually equal. X-height
 is a key distinguishing feature of a font and, as detailed in the chapter
‘Designing paragraphs: text size’ in part 1 of this book, the relationship of
 x-height to cap height defines the perceived type size. A typeface with a
 large x-height looks much bigger than a typeface with a small x-height
 when set at the same size.
             211   Knowing and browsing type




                   Glyph features
                   The form of a glyph’s strokes, and the basic shapes they make, give us the
                   torso of the letter. The parts attached to the torso give us the anatomical
                   features of a glyph, which lend a typeface its distinguishing characteristics.
                   The nomenclature used to label features of a glyph is as follows.

                   Arm. A stoke which joins a stem somewhere in the middle. A letter k has
                   two such arms.

                   Ascender. A stem on some lowercase letters, such as h and b, that extends
                   above the x-height.

                   Aperture. The opening of a partially enclosed part of a letter such as n, C,
                   S, the lower part of e, and the upper part of a double-storey a.

                   Bowl. The curved line which fully encloses part of a letter such as d, b, o,
                   D and B. Compare with counter, which is the interior space created when
                   a bowl is drawn.




                   Anatomical features of glyphs: strokes, shapes and positions




                     Hand
                               crossbar                                                 ascender

cap-height                                                          shoulder

x-height




baseline


                     bracket                    bowl        serif                  counter
                                                      Knowing and browsing type   212




Bracket. A curved or wedge-like connection between a serif and the main
stroke or stem.

Counter. The interior shape, enclosed or partially enclosed, in letters such
as d, o, c and s. Compare with bowl, which is the line drawn to form a fully
enclosed counter.

Crossbar. The usually horizontal stroke across the middle of letters such
as A, H and e.

Descender. Any part of a lowercase letter that extends below the baseline,
found in lowercase letters including g, j, p, q and y, and occasionally in
uppercase letters such as J and Q.

Ear. A decorative flourish usually on the upper right side of a bowl, most
often found on a lowercase g.

Eye. The counter, or enclosed space, of a lowercase e.




glovery
               ear                                                 aperture

link/neck                stem                                eye              terminal
                                                                                         contrast




                           stress axis                    modulation
                                          overshoot
                                                                                                    tail

   loop/lobe                                                                        descender
                 213   Knowing and browsing type




                       Link/neck. The join between two parts of a letter, particularly between
                       the bowl and loop of a double-storey g.

                       Loop/lobe. An enclosed or partially enclosed counter below the baseline,
                       most often found in a double-storey g, but also in cursive (handwritten)
                       styles of letters including p, b and l.

                       Negative space. White space formed within the shape and extremities
                       of a letterform.

                       Overshoot. Many letters, such as v, overshoot the baseline slightly. This
                       gives them optical balance and stops the letters looking like they are about
                       to topple over.

                       Serif. A small mark or foot at the end of a stroke. For example, when the
                       number 1 or the letter i are drawn with a bar across the bottom, the two halves
                       of the bar are serifs. If the serif is joined to the stem by a slight flaring out,
                       rather than an abrupt deviation, it is said to be bracketed (see bracket above).

                       Shoulder. The join of a stroke on to the main stem of a glyph, such as where
                       the arm of an r joins the vertical stem.

                       Stem. The main, usually vertical, stroke in a glyph.

                       Tail. A stroke on letters such as Q, K and R which descends below the base-
                       line. When an a has a stroke rising from the stem towards the next letter,
                       as you might in handwriting, this is also known as a tail.

                       Terminal. The end of any stroke that doesn’t include a serif. Some termi-
                       nals expand into shapes; for example, ball terminals and lachrymal (tear-
                       drop-shaped) terminals.


                       Learn how to describe typefaces
 This approach to      The terms we’ve just seen give us a vocabulary with which to describe type-
  describing type      faces. Descriptions, more so than arcane classification systems (more of
   is based on the
work of Prof. Indra    which later) provide practical ways to identify a typeface, understand the
   Kupferschmidt.      feeling it might impart, what purpose it could be put to, and what other
                       typefaces might be successfully combined with it. You can best describe a
                       typeface using three layers: skeleton, flesh and skin.
                                                      Knowing and browsing type   214




Skeleton
Most typefaces can be differentiated according to three basic forms des-
cribed primarily by stress and modulation. Think of these as being deter-
mined by three different writing tools.

1. Dynamic forms have a contrast and structure derived from writing with
   a broad-nibbed pen held at a consistent angle. The result is a modulated
   stroke, fairly high contrast, angled stress and open apertures. This gives
   the letters a friendly, natural feel.




Dynamic form, set in Bembo.


2. Rational forms are derived from writing with a pointed pen. The thick-
   ness of the stroke is related to the pressure put on the nib during a down-
   stroke, while other strokes remain thin. The axis is vertical with high
   but less modulated contrast and more closed apertures. This gives the
   letters a stiff and formal impression.




Rational form, set in Abril.


3. Geometric forms are modelled as if produced by a ballpoint pen. The
   letters appear more drawn than written, with consistent, mathematical
   shapes, such as an optically circular o. The axis is vertical with contrast
   low to non-existent. The letters appear mechanical and precise.




Geometric form, set in FF Mark.
               215     Knowing and browsing type




                       Flesh
                       The second layer, the flesh, forms the body around the skeleton. This com-
                       prises two components:

                       1. Stroke contrast and linearity. Typefaces can range from being extremely
                          high in contrast to appearing monolinear.

                       2. Serifs. For the flesh layer, consider typefaces as being either seriffed
                          (with serifs that taper in some form), slab serifs (with thick blocky
                          serifs) or sans serif with no serifs at all.

                       Taking the skeleton and flesh layers together give us typeface torsos suf-
                       ficiently distinct to be categorised into broad groups. Each torso can be
                       placed on a two-dimensional matrix: from dynamic through rational to
                       geometric along the horizontal axis; and from contrasted to linear down
                       the vertical axis.



Contrasted dynamic sans                 Contrasted rational sans                 Contrasted geometric sans




Contrasted dynamic serif                Contrasted rational serif                Contrasted geometric serif




Linear dynamic sans                     Linear rational sans                     Linear geometric sans




Linear dynamic serif                    Linear rational serif                    Linear geometric serif




                       Typefaces ranging from dynamic to geometric (left–right) and contrasting to linear (top–bottom).
                                                             Knowing and browsing type   216




As well as providing a useful structure for identifying stylistically related
typefaces, this matrix can help you easily combine typefaces. All fonts
that stand in one column will combine harmoniously, whereas mixing
the horizontal neighbours is trickier. You can also successfully combine
typefaces by going diagonally to give you a more contrasting combination.
Put simply, stay in one form model or go for lots of difference; birds of a
feather flock together, and opposites attract.

Skin
The third and final layer, the skin, is where you add in the finer details
which differentiate typefaces within the main groups. Start off by assess-
ing the x-height. Next, go on to describe features such as the precise nature
of serifs, the shapes of the terminals, the forms of individual letters, such
as a single-storey a. The skin layer should give you enough detail to cate-
gorise a typeface into a particular subgenre or classification, and if you add
enough unique characteristics, to identify the typeface itself.

Putting it all together
Let’s put the system to the test and use the three-layer model and anatom-
ical terminology to describe the typefaces used in this book.



                      high contrast,    prominent ear,




Geography
                      vertical stress    ball terminal




         large x-height                                  flattened bowl         long, cupped serifs


Ingeborg features.


Ingeborg, used for the headings, is a highly contrasted rational serif
with a tall x-height and long, slightly curved and mostly unbracketed serifs.
Finer details include ball terminals, a pronounced ear on the g, and a flat
top to the bowl of the a. The overall effect is one of sturdiness with a glam-
orous twist.
  217    Knowing and browsing type




            low contrast,        prominent ear                                      left stroke




Geography
            angled stress                                                             cut off




 large x-height                                  flattened bowl   bracketed, wedge serifs


         Premiéra features.


         Premiéra is used for the body copy and is a somewhat linear dynamic
         serif with a tall x-height and wedge serifs. Further details include a small
         and flat bowl on the a, and a pronounced ear on the g. The dynamic form
         makes it an engaging read while the generous x-height and simple serifs
         mean it renders well on screens.




Geography
             low contrast,       prominent ear                                      left stroke
             angled stress                                                            cut off




 large x-height                                  flattened bowl

         Skolar Sans features.


         Skolar Sans, used for the captions, is a linear dynamic sans serif with
         a tall x-height. It too has a small and fairly flat bowl on the a, and a pro-
         nounced ear on the g.
             Armed with our descriptions we can now investigate why these type-
         faces might work well together. Premiéra and Skolar Sans sit well together
         because they are both linear dynamic forms – each is formed from the
         same skeleton. The negative space in both typefaces shows many similar-
         ities and they share some of the same fine details, such as the ear on the g.
                                                     Knowing and browsing type   218




Ingeborg works well with Premiéra not because they are similar but because
they are opposites, enabling headlines to contrast robustly with body copy.
The two typefaces do, however, share some features: the pronounced ear on
the g, and the flat bowl on the a to name two. A third thing in common is
that they were released by the same foundry, namely Typejockeys, based
in Vienna.


Type genres are more useful than classifications
We’ve seen how and why you might describe a typeface as being a linear
dynamic sans serif. If you want a robust, comfortable to read, informal
typeface, this is the kind of design you might well want to go for. Unfor-
tunately, you will be hard-pressed to find any font vendor grouping type-
faces together in a category named ‘linear dynamic sans serif’, or any of
the other descriptive terms we’ve been using.
    When browsing for certain kinds of typefaces, one of the issues we
face is that there is no universal classification system for typefaces. This
is understandable. Just as pigeonholing musicians into predefined genres
is difficult and contentious, so typeface designs are subjective and genre-
spanning. For around a hundred years many people have tried to create
order from the chaos, often resulting in academic and arcane solutions far
more closely tied to historical references than to the use and impression
you want to achieve. Taken as a whole, these schemes provide us with little
more than contradictory and confusing nomenclature. Historically, some
foundries used Egyptian or Antique to mean slab serif. The French call
sans serif faces Antique, the Germans call them Grotesk, and the Ameri-
cans use Gothic. But Gothic is sometimes the term for blackletter in Euro-
pean countries.
    The classification scheme closest to a de facto standard is arguably the      In 2010, ATypI set up
most problematic and unsuitable for use in the modern day. The Vox-ATypI          a new working group
                                                                                  to revise typeface
classification started out as proposal by French typographer Francis              classification.
Thibaudeau in 1921. It is solely based on the form of the serifs, which are
used to distinguish between different style periods over the centuries.
    The Thibaudeau system was developed further by Maximilien Vox, who
published his version in 1954. Continuing with the same main groups as
Thibaudeau, Vox came up with names for the groups derived from the names
of iconic printers (garalde is a portmanteau of Garamond and Aldus; didone of
Didot and Bodoni). He also expanded the system to accommodate some sans
serif designs, but considering the likes of Helvetica had yet to be released
at this point, even his additional classifications were soon insufficient.
219   Knowing and browsing type




      The Vox system was taken over by the ATypI (Association Typographique
      Internationale) in 1960 with some slight modifications. It was subse-
      quently adopted as a international standard, including the German DIN
      in 1964 and the British Standards Institute in 1967, now notably withdrawn.
      The Vox-ATypI system has not been significantly updated since that time.
          The design of many contemporary typefaces renders Vox-ATypI inad-
      equate. Aside from the impenetrable naming scheme, Vox-ATypI puts too
      much emphasis on the historical sequence and distinguishing the subtle
      differences between early seriffed typefaces. It generalises greatly when it
      comes to sans and slab serifs, which is particularly problematic given how
      widely developed and popular these styles have become in the years since.
      Many modern typefaces draw from history but cannot be put into individ-
      ual historical categories because their designers borrowed from different
      eras and styles, then mashed them up to suit today’s tastes and needs.
          Despite this, it is worth being familiar with the Vox-ATypI terms and how
      they match, overlap and compare with more contemporary and descriptive
      categorisations. Before we do that, a short history lesson is in order.

      Know your history
      The Vox-ATypI classification scheme is tied up in history. While that is one
      of its downfalls, knowing when and where things have come from can be
      illuminating, and often goes some way to explaining why things look like
      they do. Knowing the history, heritage and geography of typefaces can be
      fascinating and useful when you’re in the process of choosing fonts (it can
      also help you avoid embarrassing mistakes that, admittedly, would only be
      picked up by fellow type nerds).
          Western typefaces first appeared around 600 years ago, when Johannes
      Gutenberg introduced mechanical movable type printing to Europe. The
      typeface Gutenberg introduced was a textura blackletter based on the let-
      tering of monks and scribes who up until that time were solely responsible
      for the production of books. The so-called roman letterforms we are more
      used to nowadays were also around in hand-lettering at the time (known
      as Carolingian script), and it was only a few decades after Gutenberg intro-
      duced the press that roman fonts began to appear.
          Since then, many new genres of typeface have appeared, but these never
      supplant earlier designs – they are added to the canon of possibilities. Type-
      faces designed in the fifteenth century are still in use today, albeit primarily
      in digital incarnations. The dates in the following timeline indicate when
      the style first began to appear, and the example typefaces given are taken
      from that time where possible.
                                                      Knowing and browsing type   220




15th century: Old-style serif
The original form of roman typefaces are humanist serifs. They are dynamic
in form with a diagonal stress and a gradually modulated, low to moderate
contrast. They can be further divided into the Venetian style, which has
an angled crossbar on the e; and the French or Dutch style (appearing in
the 17th century), in which the e usually has a smaller eye. Both variants
tend to have bracketed, sometimes asymmetrical serifs. Examples include
Jenson, Centaur, Garamond and Bembo.

Early 18th century: Transitional serif
Transitional – or realist – serifs saw a gradual move away from letterforms
resembling handwriting. They are more rational in nature, with a mostly
vertical stress, an increased contrast and more regular proportions. They
have a larger x-height than old-style serifs, with apertures more closed,
bracketed serifs and often lachrymal terminals. Examples include Caslon,
Baskerville, Bell, Bulmer, Scotch Modern and Bookman.

Late 18th century: Rational serif
So-called modern serifs take the realist form to an extreme, with upright
rational forms and high contrast between thick vertical stems and fine hori-
zontal hairlines. The serifs are horizontal, thin and abrupt. The letterforms
are consistently structured and often feature ball terminals. In the 19th
century, the style was exaggerated into font designs for display purposes.
Examples include Didot, Bodoni and Walbaum.

19th century: Realist sans serif
The first sans serifs were literally labelled ‘grotesque’. The advent of the
Industrial Revolution had led to cheaper paper and printing costs, so set-
ting type in relatively huge sizes became economically viable. At this time,
display fonts were made from wood, which is likely to have influenced the
simplified shapes of these designs.
   Realist sans serif typefaces have upright, rational forms analogous to
the transitional serifs, with relatively low-contrast linear strokes and closed
apertures. Early forms have a double-storey g and a diagonal leg on the R.
Later, mid-twentieth century neo-grotesques are more open with larger
x-heights. Examples include Franklin Gothic, Akzidenz Grotesk, Helvetica
and Univers.
221   Knowing and browsing type




      19th century: Rational slab serif
      At the same time as the sans serifs, slab serifs were appearing, again ini-
      tially for display use. Stylistically, they began with block-like rectangular
      serifs added to the emerging realist sans serifs. The sturdy rational low-con-
      trast designs held up well under adverse printing conditions, and text faces
      were developed with ball terminals and bracketed serifs (familiarly known
      as Clarendons). Examples include Serifa, Clarendon, Century Schoolbook.

      20th century: Geometric sans and slabs
      The geometric sans serif developed in 1920s Germany in the attempt to
      further rationalise the vernacular grotesques. The letters are constructed
      with optically corrected geometric forms based on circles or rectangles, and
      very little contrast. The a and g are usually single-storey. Slab serifs were
      added to the geometric forms, often literally – Lubalin Graph is a modifi-
      cation of Avant Garde. Examples include Futura, Avenir, Century Gothic,
      Lubalin Graph, Memphis.

      20th century: Humanist sans
      As a counterpoint to the industrialisation of the early 20th century, human-
      ist sans serifs appeared, bringing dynamic forms reminiscent of the old-
      style serifs of the Renaissance. These were more calligraphic in nature and
      were usually drawn with true italics. Examples include Gill Sans, Frutiger,
      Syntax, Optima.

      Late 20th century: Contemporary serif
      Various forms with low contrast, large x-heights, wide apertures and chunky
      serifs. Pragmatic, highly functional designs with details simplified to work
      on poor paper, low-resolution printing and screens. Examples include Fedra
      Serif, Premiéra, Skolar, Georgia.

      Late 20th century: Revivals and synthesis
      From the later 20th century, the landscape of typeface design changed
      hugely. There was an exponential increase in available typefaces, made pos-
      sible by digital fonts supplanting metal and wood, and further expanded by
      the distribution channels of the internet. In terms of design, contemporary
      typefaces are either revivals or syntheses. As the saying goes, originality is
      for people with short memories.
          Revivals are remakes of past typefaces, digital incarnations of iconic
      designs from earlier centuries for use in today’s typographic settings. Some
      of these attempt to faithfully reproduce the feel of the original metal type,
                                                      Knowing and browsing type   222




correcting poorly made versions created in the early days of digital fonts
(Lars Bergquist’s Baskerville 1757 is one such example). Otherwise classic
designs are modified for contemporary tastes and expanded with character
sets and features possible in modern technology. Examples include Mark
Simonson’s Bookmania and Kris Sowersby’s Founders Grotesk (derived
from early 20th century sans serifs).
   The most interesting typefaces of modern times do not fit easily into
historical categories. These designs are a synthesis of different styles, merg-
ing different forms through cumulative experience. By way of example, Jos
Buivenga’s Calluna has the solidity of a transitional serif combined with
the flow and dynamic form of an old-style. Hoefler & Co’s Sentinel is a
Clarendon-like rational slab serif with added contrast and reduced serifs
for improved readability; it also has an accompanying true italic missing
from the original 19th century faces. The multifaceted typeface Abril, by
Veronika Burian and José Scaglione at TypeTogether, was designed from
the ground up with two different complimentary forms. The display styles
are based on the high-contrast rational serif form, while the text style is
based on the lower-contrast transitional form; but because the two were
designed at the same time they are entirely compatible, with consistent
shapes and features.

You can’t copyright a typeface design
Revivals and derived designs are perfectly allowable as it is not possible
to copyright a typeface design, the thinking being that to do so would be
akin to copyrighting the alphabet. The only protection you are afforded as
a designer is a trademark for the typeface’s name. Over the centuries this
has led to lots of very similar or even identical typefaces with different
names. However, digital fonts are deemed software, and software is cov-
ered under copyright. This means you can’t just copy some digital files and
rename the font. You could, though, print out each character of a font (in
each weight and style) and draw a brand new set of vectors from scratch
for every single glyph, correct the spacing around the characters, kern the
letter pairs, test it at multiple sizes on multiple paper stocks, hint the font
and test on multiple screens. And think of a new name.

Understand type categories
Typographers, graphic designers and type vendors mix different terminol-
ogies and classifications when grouping type. Some categories have a mul-
titude of synonyms, many of which you will come across at some point
when browsing typefaces. Descriptive rather than historical classifications
223   Knowing and browsing type




      are becoming more common, and so the following categories map stylistic
      genres and subgenres to alternative names, including the Vox-ATypI system
      (italicised). The categories detailed are divided into serif, sans serif and
      slab serif styles, which cover all typefaces suitable for body text as well
      as many display faces. Script fonts are much less used on the web, and
      decorative display faces rarely fit into any consistent categories, so they
      are not covered here.

      1. Humanist serif
      Dynamic form, moderate contrast. Very calligraphic with consistent stress
      angle and bracketed, often asymmetrical serifs.
      also known as: classical, old-style, dynamic, Renaissance, humane, antiqua,
      medieval.
      use and impression: Long or short text. Friendly, open, rich, flowery,
      importance, reverence, historical, natural world.



          Minion




          Fedra Serif




          Scala




          Karmina




          Skolar




      Humanist serifs.
                                                   Knowing and browsing type   224




1a. Garalde
Small counter and horizontal crossbar on the e.
also known as: garalde, Aldine, French old-style



    Adobe Garamond




    Bembo




    Goudy Old Style




    Sabon




    Magneta




Humanist garalde serifs.
225   Knowing and browsing type




      1b. Venetian
      Diagonal crossbar on the e.
      also known as: humanist



          Calluna




          Adobe Jenson




          Centaur




          Feijoa




      Humanist Venetian serifs.


      1c. Dutch-taste
      Denser with more contrast.
      also known as: Dutch old-style



          Janson




          Adobe Caslon




      Humanist Dutch-taste serifs.
                                                        Knowing and browsing type    226




2. Transitional serif
Rational form, higher contrast, larger x-height. Slightly calligraphic with varia-
ble stress angle, bracketed serifs and bulbous terminals.
also known as: transitional, réale, Baroque.
use and impression: Long text, newspapers, magazines, serious, expedi-
ence, authority, magazines, forward-thinking, charm, swagger, exuberance.



    Perpetua




    Plantin




    Arnhem




    Bookmania




    Libre Baskerville




    Mrs Eaves




Transitional serifs.
227   Knowing and browsing type




      3. Rational serif
      Rational form, strongly modulated high contrast. Regularised structure with ver-
      tical stress. Often thin, unbracketed serifs and ball terminals.
      also known as: modern, didone, neoclassical, classicist, static, romantic.
      use and impression: Headlines, elegance, stylish, fashion, wine, roman-
      tic, expensive, artisanal, reminiscing.



          Bauer Bodoni




          Ingeborg




          Abril Display




          Questa




          Lust




          PF Regal Finesse




      Rational serifs.
                                                  Knowing and browsing type   228




3a. Scotch
Much lower contrast with bracketed serifs and more robust features.
use and impression: Long form text, newspapers



    Abril




    Georgia




    Miller




    Benton Modern




    Bressay




Rational scotch serifs.
229   Knowing and browsing type




      4. Grotesque sans
      Rational form, modulated low contrast. Somewhat irregular, narrow propor-
      tions based on ovals rather than circles. Double-storey a and g.
      also known as: lineal, grotesque, grotesk, gothic, lineale, realist, industrial.
      use and impression: Headlines, short text, lively, energetic, industrial.



          Franklin Gothic




          Aperçu




          Questa Sans




          Adelle Sans




          Tablet Gothic




          Marr Sans




      Grotesque sans serifs.
                                                     Knowing and browsing type   230




5. Neo-grotesque sans
Rational form, low contrast. Large x-height, closed apertures, wider and more
regular and circular shapes, usually horizontal terminals.
also known as: lineal, neo-grotesque.
use and impression: All text and signage, neutral, grids, subtly informal.



    Univers




    Helvetica




    National




    New Transport




    Activ Grotesque




    LFT Etica




    JAF Facit




Neogrotesque sans serifs.
231   Knowing and browsing type




      6. Geometric sans
      Geometric linear form. Contrast is sufficient to optically correct but little more.
      Shapes are based on circles or squares, with moderate apertures.
      also known as: lineal, geometric, static.
      use and impression: Headings, longer text, modern, technical, mechan-
      ical, infographics, vintage, authority.



          Futura




          Avenir




          Gotham




          PF Din Text




          Overpass




          FF Mark




          FS Emeric




      Geometric sans serifs.
                                                  Knowing and browsing type   232




7. Humanist sans
Dynamic form, moderate contrast. Calligraphic forms with open apertures.
Contemporary forms have lower contrast with very open apertures.
also known as: lineal.
use and impression: Long text, fresh, warmth, charm, approachable ,
readability, energetic, cheerful, organic, active.



    Gill Sans




    Bliss




    TheSans




    Frutiger




    Syntax




    FS Albert




    Akagi




Humanist sans serifs.
233   Knowing and browsing type




      7a. Glyphic
      Low contrast with forms derived more from chiselling and inscribing than
      writing. Usually feature narrowed stems and flared terminals which almost
      become serifs.
      also known as: inscribed, engraved, incised, flared, stressed.
      use and impression: Signage, headlines, official, ceremonial, establish-
      ment, warmth, wellness, cosmetics.



          Optima




          Albertus




          Alverata




      Glyphic sans serifs.
                                                     Knowing and browsing type   234




8. Grotesque slab
Rational form, low contrast. Similar to grotesque sans serifs, with the addi-
tion of heavy rectangular slabs, closed apertures and often ball terminals.
also known as: mechanistic, mechane, Clarendon, Egizian.
use and impression: Headlines, short text, vintage, ephemera, powerful,
industrial, smile.



    Clarendon




    Serifa




    Century Modern




    Sentinel




Grotesque slab serifs.
235   Knowing and browsing type




      9. Geometric slab
      Geometric linear form. Minimal contrast, with unbracketed rectangular serifs
      the same width as the stems.
      also known as: mechanistic, mechane, egyptian, egyptienne, antique.
      use and impression: Headlines, short text, industrial, friendly, cookbooks,
      architectural, handmade.



          Memphis




          ITC Lubalin Graph




          Rockwell




          Archer




          Bague Slab




          Museo Slab




      Geometric slab serifs.
                                                     Knowing and browsing type   236




10. Humanist slab
Dynamic forms with low contrast. Similar proportions to humanist sans serifs,
with the additional of unbracketed rectangular or wedge serifs.
also known as: mechanistic.
use and impression: All text, professional, business, approachable,
informal.



    PMN Caecilia




    Chapparal




    Adelle




    FF Tisa




    Guardian Egyptian




Humanist slab serifs.
237   Selecting typefaces for body text




      Selecting typefaces
      for body text

      The job of the typeface for the majority of text in a website is to
      get out of the way and let the words speak. It should be unob-
      trusive, so that eye-catching headings can stand out, and steady
      so that your reader can skim and flow as required. The choice of
      typeface also sets the tone for the text.

      The features of the typeface may not be noticed or even discernible to the
      untrained eye, but they do register as they change the feel and texture of
      the text. Even if your reader is not consciously aware of the type they’re
      reading, they’ll certainly be affected by it.


      Remove the friction between reader and text
      While you can set the tone for a piece of text with your choice of typeface,
      the primary decision should be about removing as much friction as pos-
      sible between your reader and the text. A smooth-reading typeface is one
      with instantly determinable letterforms and an inviting flow to usher your
      reader through the text.
         Your reader shouldn’t notice the type. They shouldn’t squint, stumble,
      halt, or find cause to examine the type. If they do, their reading experience
      will have been interrupted and even cut short. Your prime directive is to
      ensure that you are not making choices which are difficult or uncomfort-
      able to read.

      Choose robust faces for better readability on screens
      Typefaces designed for body text are intended to be read easily and smoothly
      at small sizes. To achieve this, their glyph shapes are made intentionally
      uncomplicated and sturdy. Screens are hostile environments for type to
      live, as described in ‘How fonts render on screens’. Type survives on screens
                                                                    Selecting typefaces for body text   238




as it does in other challenging environments, like newspaper print and
signage, with high x-heights, low contrast and few frills.
    Small x-heights are problematic because they draw too much attention
to capitals and extenders. Subtle and delicate letterforms stand little chance
and are lost in the coarseness of rendering environments. Distinctive glyphs
end up exaggerated and distracting.
   Although modern screens have a pixel density capable of rendering intri-
cate glyphs, the nature of emitted rather than reflected light eats into those
forms. Robust shapes stand up to this bullying, leaving high resolutions to
render any subtleties, thereby rewarding you and your reader in tempering
the ruggedness of the type.
    The categories newspapers turn to for robustness are Scotch transi-
tional serifs and humanist slab serifs. Signage tends to use humanist sans
serifs, particularly those which are more on the geometric side. These cat-
egories tend to produce low-contrast type, with open counters and sturdy
terminals, all of which are ideal characteristics for maintaining readability
on screens.




Top: Oxtail is a charming typeface but it’s a bad choice for body text. Its high contrast and quirky
serif styles make it feel distracting for running text.

Bottom: Abril Text has a relatively high contrast and is full of personality, but its slab serifs and
consistent forms subdue any potential distractions.


Choose active texture and even colour for a smoother read
Your reader may be spending a great deal of time with the type, and if you
have done your job well they could lose track of that time altogether. Such
239   Selecting typefaces for body text




      a pleasurable reading experience is provided by a typeface with a smooth,
      active texture. If your reader was instead a listener settling in for a lengthy
      recitation, they wouldn’t want to listen to a dull, monotonous, somnolent
      delivery. Neither would they want to endure a melodramatic rendition with
      histrionics and overacted enunciation. They would want a clear, engaging
      delivery with enough vocal variation to keep their interest, but not so much
      as to become tiresome and irritating.
         An orator’s vocal variation is equivalent to a typeface’s texture. For tone,
      rate and volume, think contrast, flow and size. Texture is the apparent
      visual activity of a text block. Good body text typefaces have an active
      texture that is not too lively and not too dull. An active texture will have
      glyphs with a certain amount of contrast and flow from one character to
      the next. Textures which are too lively, caused by high contrast and com-
      plex shapes, make reading strenuous because they demand too much
      attention. Dull textures with no contrast or flow make distinguishing let-
      terforms harder and require more effort to skip along a line of text.




      Top: Museo Sans’s shapes are sturdy and its colour is even, but its texture is fairly dull. As a
      multipurpose font it does a good job, but does little to energise the reader.

      Bottom: FS Emeric has subtly chiselled terminals, an openness to its characters, and micro-
      modulations in weight, all of which invite the reader to skip along the lines.


      Body text typefaces are also designed for an evenness of typographic colour.
      Typefaces with patches of dense blackness or whiteness, resulting from cer-
      tain character shapes and combinations, add friction to the reading experi-
      ence. Type with spotty colour along a line is often more upright and narrow,
                                                 Selecting typefaces for body text   240




as in low-contrast grotesque sans serifs. High-contrast rational serifs can
suffer from patchiness within words if too many thin or thick strokes line
up next to one another.
    Texture and colour are inevitably influenced by aspects of the type-
setting, particularly line height and word spacing. We can identify fonts
with sturdy shapes and even colour, but a suitably active texture can only
be achieved by setting the text block well, as described in ‘Designing par-
agraphs: line spacing’.
    If the text you are setting is shorter – intended more for scanning and
snacking than immersive reading – you might pique your reader’s inter-
est with the initial swagger of a more idiosyncratic typeface. Where such
lively type might tire your reader over a long period, it might be just what
is required to attract the attention for a few minutes.


Choose faces in keeping with the text
 In 1955, Beatrice Warde, an American communicator on typography, pub-
 lished a series of essays entitled The Crystal Goblet, in which she wrote:
‘People who love ideas must have a love of words. They will take a vivid
 interest in the clothes that words wear.’ And with that proposition Warde
 introduced the idea that just as we judge someone based on the clothes
 they wear, so we make judgements about text based on the typefaces in
 which it is set. Typefaces are the clothes words wear, and just as the choice
 of clothing says something to us about the wearer, so the choice of type-
 face says something about the text and its author.
     Your job is to choose typefaces that will honour and elucidate the char-
 acter of the text. Think about the topic of the text but – more importantly
– get to grips with the nature of the writing. Think of words that describe
 the way the writer is coming across; these are the feelings and moods you
 need to impart with your design. The text might be about a serious disease,
 but maybe the words provide an optimistic, self-effacing view of caring for
 someone; this would warrant type with a lighter touch, such as a human-
 ist sans. Alternatively, the piece might be reporting academic research, in
 which case it would deserve a more serious, authoritative face, such as a
 transitional serif.
     Perhaps the text you are designing is for the pharmaceutical industry.
 You could take many different approaches, each of which might be valid
 depending on the topic and nature of text, and whether it is in keeping
 with the wider brand and context.
241   Selecting typefaces for body text




      • Chemical plants and engineering would lead you towards a face that is
        more industrial in feel, such as a grotesque slab serif.
      • You could evoke the feeling of a chemistry lab through a simple and
        scientific face that you might find among the geometric sans serifs.
      • Research findings would require something more grounded and aca-
        demic, as you might find in a modern take on a humanist serif.
      • To give the right feel for health and wellbeing, you would turn to a
        humanist sans serif.




      Clockwise from top-left: grotesque slab serif (Serifa); geometric sans serif (FF Mark); humanist serif
      (Bembo); humanist sans serif (Bliss).


      Returning to Warde’s analogy, imagine an auditorium filled with the target
      audience of the web page. Now consider the text being delivered as a speech.
      What would the orator(s) be wearing and why? Referring to ‘Knowing and
      browsing type’, how would that attire translate to typefaces?
         In your final choice, remember that suits come cheap and shabby as
      well as finely tailored. The fit and the detail in the design make the differ-
      ence. If your speaker wears jeans and a T-shirt to be casual and approach-
      able, they needn’t be scruffy and unkempt. Jeans and T-shirts can still be
      uncreased, well fitted, contemporary and sharp.
                                                       Selecting typefaces for body text   242




There’s no such thing as a neutral typeface
You cannot make a choice that calls for a neutral typeface. This would imply
your author is expressing no opinion, has nothing to say and their writing
is deliberately soulless. You cannot wear neutral clothes. Boring, predicta-
ble, unadventurous and inoffensive, perhaps; but never neutral. Your deci-
sion to play it safe sartorially is nonetheless a decision and, by definition,
not neutral.
    Should you require something neutral, you probably mean the text calls
for what some might describe as a ‘boring’ typeface – one which gets out
of the way and lets the ideas shine through. Any successful boring type-
face will have been carefully designed to be highly readable in a way that
doesn’t bring attention to itself. It will be quiet, reliable and helpful, with
just enough texture to guide the reader without being noticed. That is not
neutral and bereft of character; that is subtle and deliberately so.

Choose a face whose history and culture resonates with
the text
Typefaces carry baggage from the time, place or reason they were designed,
and the way they have been used in the past. They tap into a complex library
of associations we’ve all been building up throughout our lives. You make
more associations every time you see a font in a certain context. Typefaces
can give a sense of place, evoke a mood or even refer to a specific period in
history. Ensure your typeface’s history and culture are harmonious with
the subject matter of the text. These associations need to complement what
you’re trying to convey if the font is to work with the text and your design,
not against.
    Your approach can be quite simple. For overtly modern subjects, choose
a recent typeface. For historical subjects, choose an older face (or one der-
ived from an older style). You could even find a font that was created the
same year the client’s organisation was founded, although the chances of
it being appropriate are slim.
    If you are setting text written by a woman, you could choose a type-
face designed by a woman1; for example, Carol Twombly, Veronika Burian,
Nicole Dotin, Freda Sack, Zuzana Licko and Nina Stössinger. That’s not to
say either the type or the text would be – or need to be – at all feminine,
but there’s an association which might help you whittle down choices.




1   For more about – and from – women in type, see Alphabettes (http://wbtyp.net/38).
243   Selecting typefaces for body text




      For text about the Netherlands you could choose a typeface from a Dutch
      designer. In this case you’d be spoilt for choice as anecdotally2 there are
      more type designers per capita there than in any other country. Contem-
      poraries include Erik van Blokland, Jos Buivenga, Luc(as) de Groot, Martin
      Majoor, Fred Smeijers and Gerard Unger, to name but six. You could also
      reach back four centuries to the original days of Dutch-taste human-
      ist serifs and the work of Anton Janson. Clearly, not every font by these
      designers will be suitable for your purposes, or even Dutch in any recog-
      nisable way, but if you’ve got a Dutch-designed typeface on your shortlist
      it could become a real contender in this scenario.
          The right font must primarily match all your practical and subjective
      criteria. Just as you wouldn’t set a text about ancient Egypt entirely in
      Papyrus, if you are designing a text about early 19th-century Italy, instead
      of reaching for the nearest Bodoni, and losing all its high-contrast glory
      on a low-resolution screen, you might be better off with a more robust
      descendant, such as Dalton Maag’s Bressay.

      Do some detective work
      The best way to find out if a typeface is appropriate or, more likely, inappro-
      priate is to track down information about the typeface itself. Head to either
      the designer’s or foundry’s website, or their printed specimens (often beau-
      tiful, collectable and free). A typeface’s background information reflects
      the tremendous amount of thought and research poured into the work.
      Designers will often outline why they created a typeface, from where they
      drew their inspiration, and what they intended the type to be used for.
          Don’t neglect to research how the fonts have been used in the past.
      Check books, magazines and useful websites like Fonts In Use (http://
      wbtyp.net/52) and Typewolf (http://wbtyp.net/55). There maybe associ-
      ations with incompatible topics and styles of which you may be unaware.
      Try not to choose a typeface that transmits something that the text doesn’t
      say. It shouldn’t communicate something you don’t want to communicate.


      Make a specimen to reduce your shortlist
      In ‘Responsive paragraphs’ we talked about testing your typographic
      design in a responsive prototype. Create a sampler to compare your can-
      didate typefaces side by side.


      2   According to Dutch designer Gerard Unger in ‘Dutch Type Design’ (http://wbtyp.net/10)
          by Peter Biľak in Typotheque articles (2004).
                                                 Selecting typefaces for body text   244




Sampler with twelve candidate typefaces.


Narrow down your choices and experiment with them in more detailed
browser-based specimens. Make a page containing different kinds of likely
content as well as paragraphs: headings and subheadings, a list, a table,
some captions. Also include some bold, italic and any other styles (such
as small caps) which you might want to use.
    The samplers and specimens you compile are to help you evaluate type-
faces for body text. The example content you use should, therefore, be
as real as possible. You should want to read a specimen’s content. With
well-considered, representative content in place, you’ll be able to better
focus on whether the typefaces properly represent the personality you’re
trying to evoke. At some point make sure you include the client or com-
pany name in your sampler. You don’t want that to unexpectedly look
weird.
   You’ll probably evaluate many different typefaces. In times gone by
this could have been very expensive, but now most web font services and
type vendors allow you to test with their entire library for very little cost
(paying the full licence once you launch with your final decision).
                      245   Selecting typefaces for body text




                            Judge typefaces in context
                            Make your decision about typeface robustness, texture and colour in every
                            context you care about. You need to ensure all your readers benefit from
                            the effort and consideration you’ve put into type selection, no matter how
                            they view your design. Load up your specimens on different devices.
                                Imagine how your audience will encounter the content. Your reader
                            might be perusing their phone on the way to work, immersed in the text
                            during a lengthy commute. If the content is interesting and comfortable
                            to read, they might pick up the piece when they get to the office, this time
                            on a desktop or laptop, and again at home on a tablet. All of these contexts
                            and other likely scenarios should figure in your evaluation process.


                            Trust your personal preference
                            Your choice of typeface shouldn’t be the design. It should serve the text
                            and the typesetting, and be decided only when you know the nature of
                            the job, as described in ‘Practical and pragmatic considerations’. Your final
                            selection is a subjective choice made from a shortlist of worthy and appro-
                            priate contenders.
Proxima Nova is a fine          Your process of elimination should never leave you with Proxima Nova
  typeface and a very       on a shortlist of one. You may, however, come to the objective conclusion
common choice. There
   are, however, other      that a geometric sans serif with neo-grotesque attributes is fit for the job. If
          possibilities.    you then pick Proxima Nova from the pool of pragmatic possibilities, know
                            that the final decision came down to your taste and preference. How you
                            come to prefer one possibility over another is where the fun lies. A fascina-
                            tion with type means your interest can be provoked at any time. You might
                            want to try a typeface for any number of reasons beyond the pragmatic
                            ones laid out over the past two chapters. The name, its designer, because
                            it reminds you of something special, because it’s beautiful, because it’s a
                            challenge, because you bought it two years ago and haven’t had a chance
                            to use it in anger yet (see ‘Building a library’). These are all perfectly good
                            reasons to choose a typeface on the proviso that it’s not wrong for the job
                            at hand.
                                                   Choosing typefaces for display   246




Choosing typefaces
for display

Display text is all about seduction. Its purpose is to draw your
reader into the content. Effective typographic seduction is expres-
sive and strong, and it takes determination and skill to make a
firm aesthetic decision.


Don’t be reverential, dogmatic or ordinary
Don’t abdicate responsibility and opt for inoffensive blandness or perceived
safety. Be appropriate, but allow your display type to have its own vernac-
ular and effect.


Influence the way people feel through type
We established in ‘Headlines and impact’ that visitors to your webpage will
see display text before they read it. This is your chance to choose a typeface
that immediately expresses what the text, and the entire website, stands for.
Through font choice and typesetting you will create an ambience and subtly
change the emotional state of your reader.
    The way you set your type – the size, spacing, colour and context – will
go a long way to forming a negative or positive experience. The quality of
your typesetting can have a notable impact on how your reader feels, but
the most significant contributor will be your choice of typeface.
    When we choose typefaces for body text, we’re driven mostly by practi-
cal decisions, aiming first for readability. The message the typeface sends
is important but considered later, and will only ever be subtle. With display
text the effect is magnified. Striking typography can make a big impres-
sion on your reader and can influence the way they actually feel.
    Our conscious mind perceives type and interprets what it sees to under-
stand what the words say. But type also communicates with our subcon-
scious. Like all visual stimuli, type taps into the amygdala, an ancient part
247   Choosing typefaces for display




      of the brain which is hardwired into our systems of protection and survival.
      Buried deep inside each hemisphere, our amygdalae perform a primary
      role in the processing of memory, decision-making and emotional reac-
      tions. One of the amygdala’s main functions in these systems is the forma-
      tion of associations between our senses and our biological needs. When we
      experience something round and soft as sweet and good to eat, or some-
      thing hard and jagged as bitter or dangerous, the amygdala holds on to that
      association. Each time the same experience is repeated, the association is
      reinforced and, through the amygdala, becomes instinctive.




      Sarah Hyndman at TEDxBedford. © TED Conferences, LLC.


      Sarah Hyndman, an expert in multisensory typography, has investigated
      how typefaces communicate with our subconscious. Demonstrating with
      conference audiences, Hyndman showed that different fonts have an effect
      on how food tastes. A rounded font placed near a bowl of jellybeans would
      make them taste sweeter, and a jagged angular font would make them same
      jellybeans taste more sour. Although not scientifically rigorous, Hyndman
      has repeated the same experiment1 on numerous occasions with the same
      result.
          Your choice of typeface can, it would seem, directly affect the senses. If
      you can affect the senses, you can alter the way people feel. You can change
      their emotional state through type alone. This is a huge opportunity. Think
      how you might want your readers to feel, because you can make them

      1   See Type Tasting (http://wbtyp.net/51) for more details of Sarah Hyndman’s work.
                                                                 Choosing typefaces for display   248




more conducive to feeling a particular emotion. Consider how you’d like
to influence their mood: for a stop-smoking campaign you might choose
a typeface to inspire them; for long-form journalism you could want them
to feel intrigued; for a tropical getaway you’d want to invoke a sense of
repose and reassurance.
    Typography does not just convey information or impart feeling, emotion
and sentiment. It also arouses preconceived ideas of trust, tone and content.




Font choice can set up expectations which are at odds with the content.


Your initial expectation of the above example, set in a cheeky rounded face,
is more likely to be ‘I love little fluffy kittens’ than a complaint against a
difficult discipline. Similarly, the following example may not be all it is
expected to be:




Blackletter is not associated with children’s books.


Your display text should connect people with the spirit and personality of
the website, and establish a relationship with the story they are about to
read. That might be a news story, the story of your product, or the history
behind a charity.
249   Choosing typefaces for display




      Working with different kinds of display faces
      When it comes to working with display typefaces, they can be divided into
      two broad categories: workhorses and personalities.

      Workhorses
      Workhorse typefaces can be bent to your will. They can be shaped in many
      different ways to perform in a wide range of identities and contexts; con-
      sequently, they are somewhat ubiquitous. Helvetica, Futura and Proxima
      Nova are good examples.
          Workhorses are versatile but take a lot of practice and a deft hand to
      work with in a unique and striking manner. Think of them as you might
      a salmon fillet. It’s a simple and flexible ingredient which you could roast,
      poach, bake, or fry in all manner of ways. But you will need a lot of skill
      and experience to turn it into a truly exceptional meal.
          Many workhorse typefaces are members of larger font families, so-
      called superfamilies. Display faces within in superfamilies are the extreme
      weights and widths. If you have chosen a body text font which is part of a
      superfamily, you could look straight away to the display styles within that
      family, knowing that the two fonts will sit together well.




      Acumin is a typical workhorse superfamily with a variety of widths and weights.
                                                     Choosing typefaces for display   250




An advantage of picking display faces from within a superfamily is that
it gives you the opportunity to choose a different style for a different size
screen. As described in ‘Headlines and impact’, for larger screens you
might want to proportionally increase the size of the your display text
compared with the body text. Choosing a more condensed style under
these circumstances means you can increase the text size without making
it uncomfortably wide. The following example has sized the text as 10 vmin
and switches the style from condensed to extra-condensed if the screen
is wider than 80 em:

   h1 {
      font-family: "Acumin Condensed", sans-serif;
      font-size: 10vmin;
   }

   @media screen and (min-width: 80em) {
      h1 {
   		font-family: "Acumin Extra-Condensed", sans-serif;
      }
   }

Personalities
The second kind of typeface is one that does most of the work for you.
These are typefaces with much more inherent character and flavour. Like
finely tailored clothing, the detail in their design adds interest to the innate
functionality. Personalities do more for you straight out of the box, but are
less malleable. It’s harder to adapt them to different identities or contexts.
    We’re not talking readymades like scary halloween fonts or party fonts
made from balloons. Personalities are quality fonts providing you with a
more esoteric ingredient. Consider them as a locally caught whole turbot
compared with a pack of farmed salmon fillets (but without the price
difference). The salmon is a tasty ingredient that can be integrated into
most forms of cuisine, whereas the turbot would be the centrepiece around
which you would build a meal. A turbot will go a long way towards you
creating something exceptional, but is suited to fewer cooking methods
and accompaniments.
                     251   Choosing typefaces for display




                           Marr Sans (above) is a slightly eccentric sans serif that lends character straight
                           away and provides editorial design with a sharp and distinctive taste.




                           FS Clerkenwell (above), based on influences from an area of London, is a
                           slab serif which provides a quirky, contemporary twist.




                           Bree (above) lends headlines character that would simply be lost should they
                           be set in Helvetica.

                           Favour personalities over flexibility
                           Both kinds of display face have their place - workhorses for flexibility, per-
                           sonalities for individuality. Be aware of which one you’re using and you
                           can treat it accordingly.
    The best guides to         For the sake of readers and consumers of content the world over, it
   specific treatments     would be preferable to see more personality typefaces being used. Like
benefitting personality
 fonts can be found in     most media for design, the web breeds homogeneity. Personalities bring
   foundry specimens.      their own idioms and sprinkle the online world with individuality and
                           charisma. They make it easier to set yourself apart from the rest. Better
                           still, with a little respect and understanding you can just let the typeface
                           do most of the job.
                                                  Choosing typefaces for display   252




Use display styles for display text
More sophisticated type families will have specific display styles which are
more than just extreme widths or weights. Display styles are variations on
the body text, specially adjusted for setting at large sizes. The variations
can be quite extreme. For example, Joshua Darden’s Freight family has five
optical sizes. Comparing Freight Macro (designed for use on screen at small
sizes) with Freight Big (designed for use at large sizes) reveals that the
display style has a greatly increased contrast and more delicate detailing,
which would be lost at small sizes. Conversely, the large x-height and crude
detailing of the text face would look clumsy and uninviting at large sizes.




Three of Freight’s five optical variations.


The most expressive display styles exaggerate design features of body text.
Questa Grande, designed by Martin Majoor and Jos Buivenga, beautifully
enhances the fine curves, flicks and curls hinted at in the text styles.




Questa Grande exaggerates Questa text styles.
253   Choosing typefaces for display




      Abril, designed by Veronika Burian and José Scaglione, takes this approach
      even further. Its text and display styles are derived from different styles
      but designed to work together in harmony. Abril Text takes its inspiration
      from both 19th-century slab serifs and Scotch Roman typefaces – it is essen-
      tially a rugged newspaper font. Abril Display applies the proportions of
      the text face to a seemingly different style, that of a rational serif, enabling
      it to hold the reader’s attention with measured tension in its curves and
      high contrast.




      Abril Display (top) and Abril Text.


      Choose display faces that reinforce the structure of the
      text face
      Display styles are an exaggeration of the text face. Sometimes this involves
      amplifying a design feature; other times it might be exaggerating a width
      or weight within a superfamily. But if no specific display style exists, you
      can look for other typefaces which magnify aspects of your text face.
          Look for similar shapes and inner structure by choosing fonts from the
      same category. As illustrated in ‘Knowing and browsing type’, Bodoni and
      Baskerville are both rational serifs, but with its high contrast, Bodoni is an
      exaggeration of Baskerville. Fira Sans doesn’t have a display style, but both
      it and Bree are dynamic sans serifs, meaning Bree could be a sophisticated
      companion to the more workaday Fira Sans text face.

      Optical sizes
      The display styles we’ve looked at so far are significantly and deliberately
      different to their corresponding text styles, taking advantage of bigger sizes
      to offer more delicate and complex forms. Even without any changes, the
      same font will look different at different sizes. In the days of metal type,
      subtle adjustments were made to the glyphs at each font size to ensure style
      and legibility of the typeface were retained throughout the various sizes.
      As the letters got smaller, spacing was increased and detail was simplified
      to maximise legibility once printed small.
                                                     Choosing typefaces for display   254




In the digital age, we can make type any size we want, but this does not
take into account how a font will look at that size. A digitised font uses the
same outlines regardless of the rendered size. Type designers are starting
to solve for this again by creating multiple versions of typefaces which
optically correct for type used at different sizes.
    Apple’s San Francisco typeface was introduced in 2015 as its operating
system font. San Francisco has two optical sizes, Text and Display. The
operating systems automatically switch between these two versions at
20 pt (at 144 dpi). The Text version has increased letterspacing to aid legi-
bility at small sizes, and there are subtle adjustments made to the outlines
of each glyph so they look best at their intended sizes. With San Francisco
on Apple’s operating systems, the letterspacing is size-specific: each font
size is intended to be used with a specific tracking value, which is auto-
matically applied by the operating system. You can specify San Francisco
for use on a web page (taking advantage of the optical features) but to do
so is not straightforward, as explained in detail in ‘Choosing typefaces for
functional text’.



    SF UI Text                                         SF Compact Text




    SF UI Display                                      SF Compact Display


San Francisco’s optical adjustments.


Microsoft commissioned Matthew Carter to create a typeface for reading on
screen, specifically as part of the ‘reading view’ mode in Internet Explorer 11.
The Sitka family has four styles, each available in six optical sizes: Small,
Text, Subheading, Heading, Display and Banner.
   Each optical style is specifically optimised for a size range and use case.
For image captions, reading view uses Sitka Small, which is designed with
thicker strokes, larger x-height, and looser letterspacing. Sitka Banner, des-
igned with thinner strokes and tighter letterspacing, is used for article titles.
             255   Choosing typefaces for display




Banner                                                 Text




Display




Heading
                                                       Small



Subheading




                   Optical sizing in Sitka (based on a sampler by Stephen Coles).



                   Keep inspired, and play
                   Choosing a typeface for display purposes is very subjective. Because you are
                   setting the text relatively large, there are fewer practicalities to adhere to.
                   It will help you enormously if you know the precise wording. The subject
                   matter and, more importantly, the tone will give you a sense of direction
                   for the feeling you need to set up.
                       When you are browsing and searching for fonts, think about the kinds
                   of emotion the text should be conveying and provoking. Should it give a
                   sense of childlike enthusiasm? Businesslike authority or edgy discomfort?
                   Should it be cutting-edge? Hipster, futuristic, sensible and secure? How
                   should the reader feel? Excited, comforted, reassured, tense?
                       Once you’ve found some candidates for a good direction, make a sam-
                   pler. Plug them into a prototype and try variations to fine-tune your choice.
                   Look at your display faces alongside the body copy. Check the rendering
                   at different sizes and on different devices to ensure the large display fonts
                   scale down well. Experiment and play – as in many walks of life, it’s the
                   best way to learn.
                                             Choosing typefaces for functional text   256




Choosing
typefaces for
functional text

Functional text is a catch-all term for any type which has a specific
purpose other than being display or body text. This includes user
interface elements, navigation and error messages; labels, such
as captions and footers; and specialised content including asides
and data visualisation.


Clearly distinguish functional text from
body text
Functional text has different, usually discrete purposes. Using context, posi-
tioning and colour will distinguish functional text from body text effec-
tively, especially when combined with the instinctive tactic of setting it
smaller than body copy. Functional text is subordinate to primary content,
and so reducing its size makes that relationship clear.
    In print, captions and labels can function at very small sizes. Setting
captions at 6 – 8 points – half the size of the body text – is not uncommon.
On screens, even at high resolutions, type that small would likely be illegi-
ble to many people. As a rule of thumb, set functional text no smaller than
75% of the body text.
    Functional text is usually short. It may be just a single word, or as much
as a couple of sentences. Small amounts of text are not as sensitive to their
setting as long-form reading. They can be scanned and interpreted quickly,
hence normal guidelines of paragraph setting can be loosened somewhat.
You can set short passages with tighter line spacing and very short lines.
You can also set them very wide if necessary, as it’s far less of a problem for
your reader’s eyes to reattach if there are only two lines of text.
257   Choosing typefaces for functional text




      Choose open, distinct letterforms for
      functional text
      Functional text needs to be glanceable and effective when set small. It
      should be set in a typeface which doesn’t scream for attention, but goes
      unnoticed. It should be compatible with the rest of the type on the page,
      but stay out of your reader’s way. It should honour the content in a way
      that doesn’t add to your reader’s cognitive load.
         Your reader will have fewer contextual clues when processing func-
      tional text, so it is vital the typeface has readily distinguishable characters.
      Your reader shouldn’t have to stop to discern if a capital I is a lowercase l
      or number 1. This is less of problem in running text where your reader has
      more context to help distinguish words. It becomes far more relevant when
      your reader encounters individual words, or mixed numbers and letters, in
      labels, serial numbers or data.




      L–R: Gill Sans and Helvetica have poor distinctions, unlike Droid Sans and Fira Sans.


      Small text, especially on screens, requires a typeface which is simple and
      unfussy. This does not specifically exclude seriffed fonts, although slab
      serifs have a more usable and robust nature that holds its own at smaller
      sizes. Functional type needs to be flexible and work well in different sizes
      and a multitude of devices. Sans serifs tend to fare the best in this regard.
          Typefaces with a large x-height are generally easier to read, and render
      better in small sizes. You still need to look for distinct ascenders, though,
      as too large an x-height will make the letters n and h difficult to distinguish.
          For type to work well at small sizes, generous letterspacing is required.
      Letters that are too close to one another can be hard to tell apart and read.
      A good functional typeface should have enough breathing room between
      letters, but resist applying letter-spacing; instead, choose a correctly
      designed font.
          Don’t choose light weights for functional text. Interfaces should look
      elegant, but however much you might prefer the aesthetics of a light font,
      usability must always win out. Neue Helvetica Light, for example, is a poor
      choice for a user interface such as an electronic programme guide (EPG): the
                                                             Choosing typefaces for functional text   258




letterspacing is tight, the thin strokes either blur unpredictably or dissolve
into the background, and it has too many indistinguishable character forms.




‘Billy Elliot’ set in Neue Helvetica Light is almost unreadable in this EPG.


Your safest approach is to look towards typefaces which were designed
specifically for signage or user interfaces. Examples include:




Typefaces designed for signage and interfaces.


All of these faces have their own character, but share the same practical
characteristics of sturdy simplicity and easily distinguishable, well-spaced
characters.
259   Choosing typefaces for functional text




      Some typeface families have special caption styles. Designed for setting
      small, these are often wider with a taller x-height than the text face. One
      such example is PT Sans Caption:




      PT Sans Caption, Text and Narrow compared.


      Captions often have to be set to a narrow measure, such as in this book.
      In these instances a condensed font may be more practical than a wider
      caption-specific face, as you’ll be able to get more words per line. Most
      faces designed for signage have been drawn with additional narrow and
      condensed styles; for example, Skolar Sans:




      Skolar Sans Extended, Text and Condensed compared.
                                            Choosing typefaces for functional text   260




System UI fonts
Functional text can often be served well by the system’s inbuilt user inter-
face fonts. These tend to be very well designed, specifically for use at
relatively small sizes, and modern operating systems have increasingly
sophisticated type rendering mechanisms; for example, Apple’s automatic
tracking adjustments of San Francisco as described in ‘Choosing typefaces
for display’.
    One way to specify a system’s UI font in your CSS is to list as many
different operating system font names as you can in a font-family rule:

   caption { font-family: -apple-system, BlinkMacSystemFont,
    "Segoe UI", "Roboto", "Oxygen", "Ubuntu", "Cantarell",
    "Fira Sans", "Droid Sans", "Helvetica Neue", sans-serif;
   }

At the time of writing, this will work, but it’s not at all future-proof as
you’ll need to update it every time a target operating system changes its
system font.
    The first two font names in the list show a promising direction, in that
they are proxies for whatever the system font is on a Mac. This approach
has been available since CSS 2.1 by making system fonts selectable through
the font shorthand. The values are single keywords which set the font
family, size, style and weight at the same time; for example, font:caption.
The intended use was (and is) for designers to be able to reliably replicate
the current system’s UI components, including the user’s preferences. The
allowed keywords are:

• caption: the font used for captioned controls (e.g. buttons,
  dropdowns, etc.).
• icon: the font used to label icons.
• menu: the font used in menus (e.g. dropdown menus and menu lists).
• message-box: the font used in dialog boxes.
• small-caption: the font used for labelling small controls.
• status-bar: the font used in window status bars.

For the most common operating systems, the font and size used is the
same across all keywords, with the exceptions of small-caption and
status-bar being smaller. For general use, the message-box keyword may
be the most appropriate as it is defined for dialog box text rather than a
more specific purpose, such as an icon label.
261   Choosing typefaces for functional text




      The font shorthand can only be used with the system font keyword on
      its own. If you add other values, such as font size, it will assume that
      message-box is the name of a font rather than a special keyword. To con-
      trol the size or style of the system font in your web page, set it afterwards.

          caption {
             font: message-box;
             font-size: 1.2rem;
          }

      One substantial thorn in the side of this technique (at the time of writing)
      is Apple’s iOS. Mobile Safari does not recognise CSS 2.1 system font key-
      words. Instead, it uses its own keywords1. If you repeat the font property
      (the order is important) you can get system fonts to work on iOS and all
      other modern browsers:

          caption {
             font: message-box;
             font: -apple-system-body;
             font-size: 1.2rem;
          }




      1   For full details see ‘Using the System Font in Web Content’ (http://wbtyp.net/23) by
          Myles Maxfield on the Webkit blog (2015).
                                                           Combining typefaces   262




Combining
typefaces
Combining different typefaces gives our designs graphical and
emotional variety, and aids the communication of hierarchy and
meaning. But it can be fraught with danger. Pair the wrong type
together and you’ll end up with awkward juxtapositions and a
visual cacophony, confusing the message and muddying the text.
Get a pairing right, and you clarify and enliven the entire read-
ing experience.


Combine typefaces for a reason
The more typefaces you use, the more voices you have vying for attention.
Sometimes simplicity can be the best approach, with the virtuoso solo
performance shining through; at other times you need the harmony and
dynamics of a full choir. A general rule is to use as few typefaces as possi-
ble in a design – two or three at most. But if you have good reason, choose
wisely and are relentlessly consistent in using each typeface for a specific
purpose, you can use a far bigger palette.
   Use different typefaces to group similar types of text under a common
visual system. You might choose different faces for display, body and func-
tional text, the different purposes having different demands on the type.
You might also choose an alternative typeface to give a unique voice to
quotes and introductions. Think about how you are building up the dif-
ferent sections of a choir, the colours on a palette, or the ingredients of a
dish. All the typefaces you use must contribute harmoniously and mean-
ingfully to the whole.
   The preceding chapters on selecting typefaces for body text, display
text and functional text explain how to choose for these purposes, and
should leave you with a shortlist for each of the different kinds of text in
your composition. This chapter will help you make your final decision by
considering which of your choices will sit best together.
263   Combining typefaces




      Start your combination with an anchor typeface
      Start with one typeface to help set a uniting voice and act as a reference
      point for subsequent choices. This could be a unique display face, a pre-
      determined logotype or masthead font, or – preferably – the body type.
          You body text represents the majority of the content, and your choice
      of typeface for this will ultimately be based on an emotional decision to
      match the tone and message of the text. Use that emotion to guide you as
      you narrow down your shortlists.
         Anchoring your decisions to a single typeface means you can look really
      closely at that choice in detail. The geometry, the contrast, the proportions
      and particular features of the glyphs can all lead you towards good matches.


      Find typefaces that complement the anchor
      Smart combinations are the key to typographic interest. Musical notes
      which are adjacent clash and cause dissonance. Notes which are further
      apart allow harmonies to emerge, particularly if taken from the same scale.
      A choir of typefaces needs both distinction and polyphony. Choose type-
      faces that don’t compete too much with each other, but aren’t so similar
      as to be barely indistinguishable.

      Combine typefaces with similar structure and form
      Harmonious typefaces have innate relationships in their underlying struc-
      ture, and complementary forms which strengthen connections within your
      design. Pair typefaces with similarities to create a visual consistency that
      will not distract your reader from the writing itself. To help do this, refer
      to the matrix of geometry and contrast we introduced in ‘Knowing and
      browsing type’ (repeated opposite). Typefaces in each column share the
      same structure and will go together well. Successfully pairing faces along
      rows is much more difficult.
          Try to find typefaces with common structures first, then look for other
      aspects of the letterforms. Enlarge the type and look at specific letters from
      each of the typefaces you might combine. Look for similar x-heights, cap
      heights, ascenders and descenders. Compare the counter in an e or a, the
      bar on a T or the loop of a g, the terminals of an f and the middle drop of
      an M. Not all features will be the same, but because you’ve picked the same
      underlying form, the inherent compatibility will still be there.
                                                                               Combining typefaces    264




            Contrasted dynamic sans                   Contrasted rational sans                 Contrasted geometric sans




            Contrasted dynamic serif                  Contrasted rational serif                Contrasted geometric serif




            Linear dynamic sans                        Linear rational sans                    Linear geometric sans




            Linear dynamic serif                       Linear rational serif                   Linear geometric serif




Typefaces ranging from dynamic to geometric (left–right) and contrasting to linear (top–bottom).


Remember that compatibility and similarity are not the same thing. For
example, a square and a circle are very different shapes, but both are strict
geometric forms that have more in common with each other than either
has with a more calligraphic shape.
    Let’s say you are designing an Italian restaurant menu and you decide                               Eurostile was designed
to consider Italian typefaces. If you were to look at Bodoni and Eurostile,                             in 1962 by Aldo Novaresi.
                                                                                                        It works pleasingly well
you would have two completely different typefaces, separated by hundreds                                at text sizes.
of years and seemingly connected by country of origin and nothing more.
And yet they work together. There’s a reason and it’s down to geometry.
Bodoni was designed with a strict vertical stress giving it many symmetri-
cal shapes that are echoed in the linear geometric form of Eurostile.




Bodoni and Eurostile working in harmony.
265   Combining typefaces




      Find complements through contrast
      When you pair faces from extremes in the same column of the matrix, you
      are choosing faces with the same skeleton but opposing high and low con-
      trast. You can choose other scales, particularly weight and width. Pairing
      fonts diagonally on the matrix provides additional contrast through form.
      Combine contrasting typefaces to reduce monotony, increase scannability
      and aid distinction.
         Another effective form of contrast is to pair a serif with a sans serif. To
      ensure harmony, look for pairings which share the same skeleton. A rational
      serif such as Bressay will sit happily with a rational sans serif like LFT Etica.




      LFT Etica and Bressay: sans and serif with the same skeleton.


      Colour and proportion
      When combining fonts it can be important they be close in colour, espe-
      cially if mixing them up in context; for example, inserted code samples
      within sentences or using serif subheadings with sans paragraphs.
          When you combine two different typefaces, consider adjusting their
      sizes. Even though two typefaces have the same body, seldom will they have
      the same size. For example, pay attention if inserting bold sans serifs of one
      typeface into seriffed running text set in another typeface.

      Stick with a single type family
      Superfamilies provide you with typefaces consisting of a ready-made variety
      of contrasting styles, widths and weights, all guaranteed to work together.
      They are the easiest and safest place to look for pairings. Combining a reg-
      ular text font with, for example, a condensed black weight will introduce
      radical but complementary contrast. Choosing a family with lots of styles
      gives you the flexibility to choose styles from just one source, knowing that
      they all have design traits in common – design traits you can get to know
      well. It keeps things simple while still giving you the opportunity to add
      hierarchy and character.
                                                                                Combining typefaces   266




Univers was one of the first superfamilies and is available in a multitude of styles.


Some superfamilies include sans and serif siblings designed to share a set
of consistent traits and play together nicely. One great example is Luc(as)
de Groot’s ground-breaking Thesis superfamily, which consists of sans,
semi-serif, serif, slab serif and Arabic faces in a huge variety of weights,
widths and styles.




TheSans and TheSerif are harmonious siblings.


Questa was designed as a multifaceted font family from the start and now
has four variations. We’ve already seen how the display style, Questa Grande,
was derived from the serif text face. Questa Sans sits perfectly with the serif
text face too, as it was the logical outcome of a process of cutting away the
hairline serifs, adjusting the contrast, and optically correcting its shapes.
Questa Slab has slab serifs added to the sans to complete the set.
267   Combining typefaces




      Questa Sans was derived by cutting away the serifs and optically correcting.


      Consider pairing typefaces from the same designer
      Many type designers leave personal stylistic thumbprints on their type-
      faces, regardless of the style, purpose or historical influence on the design.
      A canonical example are Eric Gill’s Joanna and Gill Sans, which share a very
      similar skeleton but were not specifically intended as a pairing.




      Gill Sans and Joanna.


      Another fine example is Neil Summerour’s Akagi and Magneta. These
      both have humanist skeletons influenced by Garamonds. Having the same
      x-height and similar letterforms with right-leaning vertical stress, they sit
      well together. It’s certainly not guaranteed that one designer’s typefaces
      will combine effectively, but it’s a good starting point.




      Magneta and Akagi.
                                                            Combining typefaces   268




Pair typefaces from the same foundry
Often typefaces from the same foundry go well together. In some cases,
one typeface might have been designed with another one in mind; in
other cases, a foundry might identify suitable pairings in its catalogue.
For example, TypeTogether has combination recommendations for all of
its typefaces, saying of Abril Text and Tablet Gothic that “both fonts share
the same vertical stress, large-x-height and mechanic feel.”




Tablet Gothic paired with Abril Text.


Deciding on type combinations comes down to experience and your eye.
You might instinctively think two fonts look wrong together without being
able to identify precisely why. That’s fine: cross off that pairing and try the
next one. Don’t forget to revisit your work. Fresh eyes and renewed energy
almost always result in better judgement.
269   Using web fonts




      Using web fonts

      Using web fonts can be a simple matter, but their potential impact
      on page load means there are two particular aspects you should
      optimise when using them: payload and rendering timing.

      When we render a web page using a font on a server rather than one which
      is installed on our reader’s device, that is known as a web font. There’s no
      fundamental difference between it and any other font, other than the way
      the font file is accessed. However, because they are delivered from a server,
      web fonts can increase the time it takes for a page to download and render,
      hence the scope for optimisation.


      Font-linking basics
      Linking to font files to render text in web pages has been technically pos-
      sible since 1998, when the specification was added to CSS2 and Microsoft
      introduced the original web font format, Embedded OpenType (EOT), for
      Internet Explorer. For the next eleven years no other browser supported
      the standard way to embed fonts, in part because manufacturers didn’t
      want to support the DRM-laden EOT format.
         Come 2009, Apple changed that. A new version of Safari was launched
      which supported regular TTF and OTF files as web fonts. This was soon fol-
      lowed by Firefox and Opera. The same year also saw the prompt launch of
      Typekit’s and Fontdeck’s web font services as a way to reconcile web design-
      ers’ intense desire for web fonts and type foundries’ deep concern for the
      protection of their intellectual property. The age of web fonts had begun.
         In 2010, the Web Open Font Format (WOFF) was introduced as the
      standard web font file format, and was soon supported by all browsers.
      WOFF is a wrapper for TTF and OTF files. It enables those file formats to be
      compressed while not being made available for installation directly onto
      a desktop. In 2014, WOFF2 was introduced as a new standard format with
      improved compression.
         To implement web font linking, use the @font-face rule, specifying
      the font family name (which can be anything you like), the font file URL
                                                               Using web fonts   270




and format, and optionally the weight and style of the font. For example,
to link to the Light Italic and Regular styles of a font you’re calling ‘Nice-
font’, write this:

   @font-face {
      font-family: 'Nicefont';
      src: url('nicefont_light-italic.woff2') format('woff2');
      font-weight: 200;
      font-style: italic;
   }

   @font-face {
      font-family: 'Nicefont';
      src: url('nicefont_regular.woff2') format('woff2');
      font-weight: normal;
      font-style: normal;
   }

Specify the styles of Nicefont for subheadings and paragraphs as you would
any other typeface.

   h2 {
      font-family: 'Nicefont', sans-serif;
      font-weight: 200;
      font-style: italic;
   }

   p {
      font-family: 'Nicefont', sans-serif;
      font-weight: normal;
      font-style: normal;
   }

Fonts are only downloaded as and when they are needed. In the example
above, if there is no <h2> on the page the Nicefont Light Italic won’t be
downloaded.
   Because WOFF2 is a relatively new standard, it does not have universal
support, so you need to add support for WOFF files. The src property of
the @font-face rule accepts a comma-separated list of files. The order is
important as a browser will traverse the list, skipping formats it doesn’t
271   Using web fonts




      support and stopping when it finds a file it can download successfully. To
      provide a WOFF back-up to WOFF2, add separate url and format values to
      the src property:

         @font-face {
            font-family: 'Nicefont';
            src: url('nicefont_regular.woff2') format('woff2'),
                 url('nicefont_regular.woff') format('woff');
            font-weight: normal;
            font-style: normal;
         }

      There is very little need to support older formats, including EOT. WOFF is
      the standard and has been supported by all the latest desktop browsers
      since 2011, and by all the latest mobile browsers since 2013.

      Don’t specify local fonts without due diligence
      If the font-family name you give your web font is the same as a font family
      available in your reader’s environment, the existence of that local font
      is ignored. This permits you as a designer to freely choose font-family
      names without worrying about conflicts with installed fonts.
          Should you want to specify a locally available copy of a given font, and
      download it should it be unavailable, add local() to your src list:

         @font-face {
            font-family: MyGentium;
            src: local(Gentium),
                 url(Gentium.woff2) format('woff2'),
                 url(Gentium.woff) format('woff');
         }

      The font name that you use with local() is a format-specific name that
      uniquely identifies a single font within a larger family. For OpenType and
      TrueType fonts, this string is used to match either the PostScript name or
      the full font name. Which type of name is used varies by platform and font,
      so you will need to include both of these names to assure proper matching
      across platforms.
                                                                 Using web fonts   272




   @font-face {
      font-family: MyGentium;
      src: local(Gentium Bold), /* full font name */
           local(Gentium-Bold), /* PostScript name */
           url(GentiumBold.woff2) format('woff2'),
           url(GentiumBold.woff) format('woff');
      font-weight: bold;
   }

Don’t specify a local font if you cannot be sure of its quality. Fonts end up
on people’s machines through all sorts of routes, so there is no guarantee
that the copy of Helvetica sitting on your reader’s PC will render at all well –
it might be completely bereft of hinting, for example – in which case it will
be disastrous for you and your reader. You are probably on safe ground if
you’re in a corporate environment with fonts controlled by a central server,
or if you are specifying a bespoke typeface distributed to staff which you
know to be suitable for your purposes.


Reduce your payload
Limit the number of fonts you use
Web fonts add to the weight of a page. A typical WOFF could be anywhere
between 20 Kb and 100 Kb, for a single style and weight (Asian fonts can
be an order of magnitude bigger). Complex designs increase file size, as do
OpenType features, kerning tables and hinting instructions. An individual
font is probably smaller in file size than any photo on a page, almost cer-
tainly a lot smaller than an advertising tracker, and significantly lighter
than a JavaScript framework. But in combination, font files can add up, so
limit the number of fonts you actually need. For example, you may have
chosen a different font for your navigation, but ask yourself if that was
really necessary, and whether the body text could be a suitable compromise
(the answer might well be no).

Always provide a WOFF2 option
As mentioned earlier, WOFF2 files offer improved compression over WOFF,
while still allowing fast decompression, even on mobile devices. The aver-
age saving over WOFF is 30%.
273   Using web fonts




      Subset as much as you can, but no more
      When you subset a font you remove some of the glyphs with which it was
      originally designed. Subsetting can be a highly effective way to reduce load
      (often cutting files in half). Candidate glyphs for removal include unwanted
      OpenType features and characters not required for the language in which
      the text is written. Subset too aggressively, though, and you’ll end up with
      the same problems we discussed in ‘Practical and pragmatic considerations’,
      such as this abomination:




      Mixing typefaces due to missing glyphs.


      Most type vendors and web font services now provide subsetting as part
      of their offerings.


      Optimise page render timing
      Avoid the flash of invisible text
      Font linking is pretty simple and straightforward to implement, especially
      now the necessary format options are reduced to WOFF and WOFF2. How-
      ever, it does lead to one particular quandary for web browsers – what to do
      with the web page text while the web font file is downloading and recom-
      piling. This boils down to three choices:

      1. Don’t render the web page at all until the web fonts have loaded.
      2. Render the page but hide the text until the requisite web font has loaded.
      3. Render the page and use a fallback font for the text, swapping it out
         when the requisite web font has loaded.

      The good news is that browsers have rejected option 1. The bad news is that
      they have settled on option 2, thus hiding textual content until it can be
      rendered in the desired font. This transition period is known as FOIT – the
      dreaded flash of invisible text.
          The alternative option 3 is not great either. Your reader can begin as soon
      as the content is loaded, but when the web fonts are rendered, the page
                                                                Using web fonts   274




layout will reflow to accommodate the new typeface, sometimes resulting
in a disconcerting if not confusing experience as words and lines jump
around. This is called FOUT, the flash of unstyled text, and is more often the
lesser of the two evils.
   A general goal for web designers and developers is to deliver a usable
page within one second. Lots of factors aside from bandwidth problems
can get in the way of this – we’ve already mentioned onerous advertising
and frameworks – but fonts needn’t be one of those. As problematic as
FOUT is, it would be more of a feature than a bug to see the content as
soon as it has loaded.

Use font-display to tailor browsers’ behaviour
You can tell browsers to change their behaviour from FOIT to FOUT using
a nascent CSS property under development for CSS Fonts Level 4. Use
font-display in each of your @font-face rules to control how browsers
should treat web fonts on an individual basis:

   @font-face {
      font-family: 'Nicefont';
      src: url('nicefont_regular.woff2') format('woff2'),
           url('nicefont_regular.woff') format('woff');
      font-display: fallback;
   }

The font-display property takes five values. In most cases you will want
to choose fallback.

auto The font display strategy is defined by the browser (most often
similar to block).

block The FOIT option. The browser renders invisible text at first and
swaps in the web font as soon as it loads. This value must only be used when
rendering text in a particular font is required for the page to be usable. It
must only be used for small pieces of text.

swap A FOUT option. The browser renders the text immediately with a
fallback if the web font isn’t loaded, and swaps the web font in as soon as
it loads. This value should only be used when rendering text in a particular
font is very important for the page, but rendering in any font will still get
a correct message across. It should only be used for small pieces of text.
275   Using web fonts




      fallback The preferred FOUT option. The browser waits for at most a frac-
      tion of a second before rendering the text, in a fallback font if necessary,
      swapping in the web font as soon as it loads. However, if too much time
      passes, the fallback will be used for the rest of the page’s lifetime instead.
      This value should be used for body text, or any other text where the use
      of the chosen font is useful and desired, but it’s important the reader isn’t
      disturbed by the text suddenly shifting as a new font is swapped in.

      optional The web font is used if it has already downloaded and is avail-
      able, but otherwise a fallback is used for the rest of the page’s lifetime. The
      web font might download in the background and be available to future
      page loads, but if the browser detects very limited bandwidth, it might
      choose to simply never download and use the font.

      At the time of writing, font-display is only supported behind experimen-
      tal flags in browsers, but is perfectly safe to include in your @font-face
      rules ready for when support is more widespread.

      Preload the critical font
      Preload is a relatively new web standard aimed at improving performance
      and providing more granular loading control to web developers. You can
      use preload with web fonts to reduce the amount of FOIT or FOUT visitors
      will see when they visit your site. Here’s all you need to add to the <head>
      of your page to start preloading a web font:

         <link rel="preload" href="nicefont.woff2" as="font"
            type="font/woff2" crossorigin>

      The improvement you get from preloading the font occurs because you’re
      telling the browser to start downloading the font straight away. Normally,
      the browser would have to download all the HTML and any CSS files, and
      parse the HTML and CSS on the page, matching selectors to @font-face
      rules which then initiate the font downloading. In the time it takes for
      those things to happen, a font file flagged for preloading may already have
      downloaded.
          The downside is that you pay for the preload by sacrificing initial
      render time. The page won’t start rendering on the screen until the font
      file has downloaded, so don’t preload too much or your reader will have
      to wait too long to see anything. Try to only preload a single web font –
      pick the most important one, which is most likely to be for the body text.
                                                               Using web fonts   276




Any bold and italic required will initially be synthesised, but swapped out
as soon as the pertinent font downloads.

Fine-tune your web font strategy with font events
The Font Loading API1 is a way for the browser to say which web fonts are
currently loading, which have successfully loaded, and which have failed
to load. JavaScript can be used to access events announced by the Font
Loading API, and write various CSS classes to the web page’s root <html>
element, which in turn enable you to tweak the text presentation depend-
ing on the download status of one or all of the web fonts.
   All web font services provide this functionality as standard, and there
are many online resources explaining how to use open source libraries
that do the same. Filament Group’s ‘How We Load Web Fonts Progressively’
(http://wbtyp.net/151) is a good place to start.
    Notably, most of the JavaScript functions which make use of font events
can provide a workaround for browsers that do not support font-display
options. The precise nature of each program varies, but almost all set classes
on the root to track the overall web font progress:

wf-loading Class applied while some web fonts are loading.

wf-active Class swapped in once all web fonts have downloaded, or
some have downloaded and all others failed.

wf-inactive Class swapped in if all web fonts failed to load.

Use these classes to force a browser that doesn’t support font-display
to show fallback fonts until web fonts are deemed loaded. First, set a
font-family list without the web font, and then duplicate the selector
with the addition of a wf-active class, adding the web font to the front
of the font-family list:

    h1 { font-family: "Calibri", "PT Sans", "Roboto", sans-serif; }
    .wf-active h1 {
       font-family: "Questa Sans", "Calibri", "PT Sans",
    "Roboto", sans-serif;
    }



1   CSS Font Loading Module Level 3 (http://wbtyp.net/93).
277   Using web fonts




      In this example, the browser will set headings in a system font until the
      web fonts have loaded. At that point, JavaScript swaps in the wf-active
      class, the second rule overrides the first, and the Questa Sans web font is
      used.
         You will need to apply this to every selector where you have a font-
      family property calling for a web font. This makes it a far higher mainte-
      nance proposition than font-display, which is only used in @font-face
      rules (but lacks universal support).

      Load web fonts asynchronously
      One important advantage of JavaScript font events enhancements is that
      for the programs to function as required, web fonts begin loading before
      any separate CSS files. Rather than waiting for the CSS file to load, parsing
      the HTML and CSS, and then downloading the web fonts, they are loaded
      asynchronously. This is different from the preload web font, which kicks in
      as soon as the preload <link> is encountered as the HTML downloads, but
      blocks rendering of the page.

      Choose the best fallbacks
      In the prior example, you will have seen three system fonts listed as fall-
      backs for Questa Sans. When you take a FOUT approach to web font ren-
      dering, a system font renders the text before the web font loads, so you
      need to ensure you are choosing the best possible fallback.
          Your first priority is to ensure the fallback text is as legible and readable
      as the web font. This means choosing a system font which has a similar
      x-height and renders at about the same size. Next, you need to reduce
      reflow when the web font is swapped in. For this, horizontal metrics come
      into play. If your web font is fairly narrow, your chosen system font should
      also be economical. Finally, you need to get the best stylistic match you
      can. Look in particular for similarities in the G, W, a, y and g.
          You need to pick a fallback from each of the operating systems you care
      about. These will probably include various vintages of Android, Windows,
      macOS and iOS. Start building up your font-family list by selecting the
      generic font style; for example, sans-serif. Then look to Android as it has
      the next easiest decision to make: in terms of the Latin alphabet, you can
      choose sans or serif versions of either Droid or Roboto. Now turn to iOS.
      You have a few more to choose from here: start with the core web fonts
      (Georgia, Verdana, Arial, Times New Roman, Trebuchet, and so on); then
      there are some other niceties, including Avenir, Baskerville, Futura, Gill
      Sans, Hoefler Text, Optima, Palatino, Helvetica and the San Francisco UI
                                                                 Using web fonts   278




font (which you’ll need to invoke as -apple-system). Install the free Font
Locator app2 to see a list of the fonts currently installed on your iOS device.
    Next up: Windows. Nowadays, mobile and desktop Windows share the
same fonts (mobile used to have a small subset of the desktop faces), so
your choice is pretty wide. You should find something suitable for body text
among the core web fonts, the ClearType fonts (Calibri, Cambria, Candara,
Constantia, Corbel), Segoe UI or Sitka. If none of those comes up trumps,
you’ll also find Gill Sans, Lucida Sans, Franklin Gothic Medium and Cen-
tury Gothic, among others.
    Finally, look at macOS. The choice you made for iOS might do the job
nicely. If not, there are plenty of other really good typefaces to consider.
For starters, try Athelas, Charter, Lucida Grande, Marion, PT Sans and PT
Serif, and the little known but excellent Seravek.
    Set up a web page on the devices and operating systems you are target-
ing and compare your choices alongside the web font. As a general rule,
put your final font-family rule in order of best match. In our example,
Calibri is a better match for Questa Sans than PT Sans, so it comes earlier
in the font stack. Calibri is installed with Microsoft Office, so this means
any Mac user with Office on their machine will get a slightly improved
experience, with text rendered in Calibri rather than PT Sans.




Questa Sans, Calibri, PT Sans, Roboto.


Adjust fallback font size to match x-height
We said that your first priority for a fallback font should be matching
x-height to ensure readability at the desired text size. If your fallback fonts
are, for the most part, consistently different to your web font, then you
could use font event classes to make adjustments to the fallback fonts. For
instance, if you are using a body font such as Altis, with its particularly

2   Font Locator (http://wbtyp.net/64) iOS app.
279   Using web fonts




      large x-height, you could make the fallback fonts slightly bigger so they
      appear to match. You will need to reduce the line spacing by the same pro-
      portion you increased the text size, to keep the line height the same when
      the fonts swap over.

          body {
             font-family: "Arial", "Droid Sans", sans-serif;
             font-size: 1.0625rem; /* 17px */
             line-height: 1.41;    /* 24px */
          }
          .wf-active body {
             font-family: "Altis", "Arial", "Droid Sans", sans-serif;
             font-size: 1rem; /* 16px */
             line-height: 1.5; /* 24px */
          }

      If you choose consistent fallback fonts, you can apply this methodology
      to more extreme differences in display faces. If you have a heading set in
      a large narrow web font, you could choose a regular width fallback and
      make it smaller to get closer to the horizontal metrics of the web font.
          In terms of matching x-height alone, CSS has a property designed to
      do just that. The font-size-adjust property takes a value equal to the
      aspect ratio of the web font (see ‘Designing paragraphs: text size’ for more
      detail on aspect ratios) and uses it to adjust the size of whichever fallback
      font is used. You can use an online tool3 to calculate the web font’s aspect
      ratio. Because font-size-adjust only affects the rendered size of the text,
      not the reported or calculated size, the line height remains unaffected and
      your code can be simplified:

          body {
             font-family: "Arial", "Droid Sans", sans-serif;
          }
          .wf-active body {
             font-family: "Altis", "Arial", "Droid Sans", sans-serif;
             font-size-adjust: 0.545;
          }



      3   Online aspect value calculators by Bruno Fassino (http://wbtyp.net/59) and
          Richard Rutter (http://wbtyp.net/58).
                                                                                  Using web fonts     280




             b
    The font-size-adjust property
    takes a value equal to the aspect
                                                        b
                                              The font-size-adjust property
                                              takes a value equal to the aspect
                                                                                                b
                                                                                      The font-size-adjust property
                                                                                      takes a value equal to the aspect
    ratio of the web font and uses it         ratio of the web font and uses it       ratio of the web font and uses it
    to adjust the size of whichever           to adjust the size of whichever         to adjust the size of whichever
    fallback font is used.                    fallback font is used.                  fallback font is used.

    The font-size-adjust property             The font-size-adjust property           The font-size-adjust property
    takes a value equal to the aspect         takes a value equal to the aspect       takes a value equal to the aspect
    ratio of the web font and uses it         ratio of the web font and uses it       ratio of the web font and uses it
    to adjust the size of whichever           to adjust the size of whichever         to adjust the size of whichever
    fallback font is used.                    fallback font is used.                  fallback font is used.




             b
Before and after applying font-size-adjust.
                                                        b                                       b
Services versus self-hosting
You have two ways to license and serve web fonts. You can either buy fonts
to host on your own servers, known as self-hosting, or you can rent them
from a web font service.

Web font services
Web font services provide a number of advantages over self-hosting. For a
start, you can be sure the licensing will be correct and you won’t be break-
ing any end user license agreements (EULA s) by inadvertently copying web
fonts to a server you didn’t have a licence for. You will often get access to
an entire library of fonts, all licensed for you to use.
   Web font services host the fonts for you and most charge an annual
or monthly fee. The cost includes hosting, bandwidth and delivery of the
fonts through a content delivery network (CDN). This serves files from
locations all around the world, automatically choosing the closest to reduce
response and delivery times. You may not be able to match the latency and
speed of a global CDN with your own setup.
281   Using web fonts




      Web font services also keep the fonts updated. This might include add-
      ing in missing glyphs, improved hinting, additional OpenType features or
      better compression. For some services the updates go out automatically;
      with others you are notified and the update requires some action from you
      (just in case the update unexpectedly affects the layout of your web pages).
          You can use most web font services to tune the web fonts to your
      requirements; for example, specifying which OpenType features you do
      or don’t need, and limiting the character sets to the languages you need
      to support.
          Most services optimise which font files are delivered to which browser.
      For example, older Internet Explorers (8 and below) don’t support kern-
      ing, so there’s no point wasting bandwidth with a kerning table in the
      files delivered to IE8 and earlier. Conversely, only Windows browsers use
      hinting, so there’s no need to send files to other platforms with hinting
      included.

      Self-hosting
      The main advantage that self-hosting gives you is flexibility. First of all,
      there is a one-off fee, which is easier to pass on if necessary, and can some-
      times work out cheaper in the long run than a recurring fee with a web
      font service.
         You also have flexibility in how you call in the web fonts to your pages.
      Some web font services require you to use their JavaScript. By self-host-
      ing you can choose whichever method suits you best. The flip side is that
      you are entirely responsible for how you serve web fonts. If you want any
      optimisation of file size, you will have to subset it yourself, or through a
      foundry or vendor’s tool if there is one (doing so yourself may be ethically
      justifiable, but could break your EULA). If you want to serve specific files
      to specific platforms, again you’ll have to work out how to do that your-
      self, and the same caveat applies when it comes to modifying supplied
      web fonts.
         If your site is served from a shared server in a single geographic loca-
      tion, you should consider putting your fonts on a CDN, such as Amazon S3,
      which has worldwide coverage. This will particularly benefit those readers
      who are geographically distant from your server. Australia, for example,
      has a particular problem with latency when requesting files from the US
      or Europe.
         If you bought a web font for self-hosting, keep track of when (or if)
      updates are available – these should be available free of charge, but it will
      usually be up to you to find out if an update has been made.
                                                                      Using web fonts    282




Variable fonts
In October 2016, version 1.8 of OpenType was released4, and with it an
extensive new technology: OpenType Font Variations. More commonly
known as variable fonts, the technology enables a single font file to behave
like multiple fonts. This is done by defining variations within the font,
which are interpolated along one or more axes. Two of these axes might
be width and weight, but the type designer can define many others too.




Continuous variation along width and weight axes.


The preceding image shows a variable font rendered in 36 different styles,
all from one file. If you were to pick four styles and serve them as normal
fonts, a variable font file capable of providing the same styles would be
significantly smaller than the four separate files, with the added speed
advantage of requiring just one call to the server.
    The illustration varies width and weight. Those two axes alone mean
that, according to the OpenType Font Variations specification, theoretically
1,000 × 1,000 (one million) variations are possible within the one file with
no extra data. A third axis could increase the possibilities to one billion.

4   ‘Introducing OpenType Variable Fonts’ (http://wbtyp.net/19) by John Hudson (2016).
283   Using web fonts




      At the time of writing, the technology is in its infancy, but it potentially
      opens up tremendous opportunities for new kinds of responsive typog-
      raphy. The file size savings and fine precision mean that many small
      adjustments could be made to the rendered font, potentially responding
      dynamically to the reader’s device and environment, as well to the text.
          Within the design space created by the axes of variation in a font, the
      type designer can define specific positions as named instances. Each named
      instance could appear to users of design software as if it were a separate
      font; for example, ‘regular’, ‘light condensed’ or ‘extra bold extended’.
         In the OpenType specification, five common axes of variation have
      been predefined as four-character tags: weight (wght), width (wdth), italic
      (ital), slant (slnt) and optical size (opsz). These font variations can be
      enabled by the font-weight, font-stretch and font-style properties,
      with CSS Fonts Level 45 adding new values for the properties to work with
      font variations:

      • font-weight takes any integer from 1 – 999 (not limited to multiples of
        100 as in CSS3).
      • font-stretch takes a percentage number where 100% is predefined as
        normal, 50% as ultra-condensed and 200% as ultra-expanded.
      • font-style takes an oblique angle value from oblique -90deg to
        oblique 90deg.
      • font-optical-sizing is a new property taking a value of auto or none,
        which turns on optical sizing if it’s available as an axis in the variable font.




      Continuous variation along an optical sizing axis.


      Font designers can also define custom axes with their own four-character
      tags. This enables designers to vary almost any imaginable aspect of a type-
      face, such as contrast, x-height, serif shape, grunginess, and even parts of
      individual glyphs, such as the length of the tail on a Q. Using a syntax simi-
      lar to font-feature-settings, custom axes (as well as the predefined ones)
      are available through the low-level font-variation-settings property.

      5   CSS Fonts Module Level 4 (http://wbtyp.net/95).
                                                                       Using web fonts   284




For example, the following would render text with a variation that is very
wide, light in weight and optically sized for 48 pt:

    h2 { font-variation-settings: "wdth" 600, "wght" 200, "opsz" 48; }

Visit Laurence Penney’s Axis-Praxis (http://wbtyp.net/60) to play with
variations and design instances of some variable fonts.
    As with regular OpenType fonts, variable fonts can be used as web fonts
as is, or preferably wrapped up as a WOFF. To use to a variable font as a web
font, your @font-face rule should set the format to woff-variations or
ttf-variations. If you wish to provide regular font fallbacks for browsers
that don’t support variable fonts, you can use multiple @font-face rules
where necessary, repeating the variable font each time.

    @font-face {
       font-family: 'Nicefont';
       src: url('nicefont_var.woff2') format('woff-variations');
       src: url('nicefont_regular.woff2') format('woff2');
       font-weight: normal;
       font-style: normal;
    }
    @font-face {
       font-family: 'Nicefont';
       src: url('nicefont_var.woff2') format('woff-variations');
       src: url('nicefont_black.woff2') format('woff2');
       font-weight: 800;
       font-style: normal;
    }

At the time of writing, there is support for font-variation-settings
in development versions of all the major browsers, but none support
font-weight or other such properties with variable fonts. Additionally,
the web font format needs to be woff or ttf.
   Variable fonts were jointly developed by Adobe, Apple, Google and
Microsoft. This means support in new versions of browsers should arrive
across the board as soon as the precise implementations and CSS specifi-
cations are agreed. Current estimates6 have variable fonts being a viable
option on the web by early 2018.


6   According to Typekit’s Tim Brown and Bram Stein, interviewed in ‘Variable Fonts’
    (http://wbtyp.net/31) on the Responsive Web Design podcast (2017).
285   Building a library




      Building a library

      Compiling your own library of typefaces is a lifelong endeavour.
      Assemble your library of faces slowly and well. Learn how they
      work, their virtues and limitations. You will naturally develop
      favourites and gain an instinctive feel for when one typeface will
      do a job better than another.


      Develop your own taste and preferences
      When we talk about building up a library, it’s not so much about buying
      an expensive collection of fonts over time, but getting to know, use and
      deeply understand your own particular selection.
          When it comes to selecting type for a job, some designers spend days
      luxuriating in research: downloading type specimens, noodling with on-
      line typesetting apps, comparing character sets, weights and alternates.
      This is time well spent. Doing so will broaden and deepen your knowledge,
      opening up opportunities to expand your typographic palette.
          Other designers will reach straight for their familiar go-to repertoire,
      experienced and confident in the applicability of their choices. Either one
      of these approaches is appropriate for a given job.
          Italian designer Massimo Vignelli, responsible for the New York City
      Subway map, among other iconic designs, railed against desktop publish-
      ing and the freedom to butcher any available typeface as ‘a disaster of mega
      proportions [and] a cultural pollution of incomparable dimension’. He maintained
      that twelve typefaces should be all someone needs in their canon1.
          To draw attention to the issue, he made an exhibition showing work that
      Vignelli Associates had done over many years consisting of only four type-
      faces: Garamond, Bodoni, Century Expanded and Helvetica. The aim of the
      exhibition was to show that a large variety of work could be achieved with only
      a few typefaces. In other words, it’s not the type but what you do with it that
      counts, and if you know the type well enough you can work it to your needs.

      1   ‘The Vignelli Canon’ PDF (http://wbtyp.net/34) by Massimo Vignelli (2009).
                                                                       Building a library   286




Vignelli’s point is well made, but flawed. Your typographic palette should
be small enough that you know intimately how each face works under all
manner of conditions, to the point you can instinctively reach for a suita-
ble option for any job. But to stop when you reach twelve typefaces would
be very sad indeed. It’s true that font design follows Sturgeon’s law2 and we
might be better off if many typefaces had never seen the light of day. But to
say that twelve will do, and that those are – and always will be – the pinna-
cle of type design is nonsense. Of course, you don’t need to use a different
typeface for every new job, particularly when it comes to body text, but to
limit yourself to an arbitrarily small number is a wasted opportunity. It is
an insult to your reader, and to those designers, standing on the shoulders
of giants, pushing forward the technical capability, aesthetics, readability
and durability of modern typefaces. To say ‘I have enough’ is to deprive
yourself of the joy of discovering, learning and using a new typeface.


Steal inspiration, don’t copy
Pablo Picasso once said ‘When there’s anything to steal, I steal.’ Explaining
this, he said of his contemporary Henri Matisse:

    You have got to be able to picture side by side everything Matisse and I
    were doing at that time. No one has ever looked at Matisse’s painting more
    carefully than I; and no one has looked at mine more carefully than he.

The difference between copying and stealing in this case is not one of
intellectual property rights. It’s not about taking someone else’s idea and
pretending it’s yours. If you copy someone else’s type choice or technique
without thinking, you’ll be using something that worked for them in their
circumstances. By stealing an approach, you are making it your own. You’ll
have to ascertain why it worked for the originator, and how it can work for
you, adapting and moulding the approach as necessary, completely chang-
ing the context if necessary.
    Get your inspiration from where fonts are actually being used. Consider
it an investment to spend part of your week looking closely at other peo-
ple’s work. Screenshot nicely designed websites, tear out or scan pages of
magazines, visit design review sites and read typography blogs (see the bib-
liography for suggestions). Identify graphic and web designers you admire


2   The adage commonly cited as ‘90% of everything is crap’ is derived from quotations
    by Theodore Sturgeon, an American science fiction author and critic.
287   Building a library




      and try out their preferred typefaces. Look at the font choices they made
      and the way they use them. Finding designers you like and adopting their
      type palettes is an effective way to shape your own library. Subscribe to
      font services and make full use of the favouriting functionality provided
      by type services.
         It pays to be a design sponge in the wider world. Magazines are cur-
      rently undergoing something of a revolution. Look to them for inspiration,
      but not just the hipster designer ones. Go outside your realm - there are
      many things to steal from the mainstream as well as the underground.
      Go back in time to classic posters or advertising from the 1970s (or even
      the 1980s, if you must). Keep searching for typography that works for you.
      Identify fonts3 and spend time investigating them. If you feel an affinity
      with a particular typeface, research the history and work of the designer.
      You may find their other typefaces work in a way you like too.
         Spend time on type foundry websites. They are often great sources of
      beautiful and expressive typography, as their intention is to show off the
      typefaces in ways for which they were designed.

      Get what you pay for, and pay for what you get
      Building up your typographic knowledge and repertoire means a lot of
      playing, experimenting and working with type. In the past (before digital
      fonts or the internet) this would have been prohibitively expensive. With
      the advent of the internet, access to a vast array of fonts became possible,
      but still either costly or frequently illegal. More recently, retail models have
      changed for the better. Almost all professional fonts are available through
      online services and libraries designed to give you cheap or free access to
      typefaces for trial and experimentation purposes. Some foundries, such as
      Dalton Maag, offer downloads of fonts on a free-to-try, pay-to-use basis.
          Designing and developing a professional typeface takes many, many
      months of meticulous work4. While many of the font distribution and
      vending services are run by large, publicly listed companies, the majority
      of type designers work as individuals or small independents. It’s vital for
      their livelihoods and the cultural vibrancy and longevity of graphic design
      that you honour their work correctly. Ensure you, your agency, company
      or client pays for the right licence when it is required – you have a moral,
      as well as legal, obligation.

      3   Plenty of automated tools exist to identify fonts. For example: Identifont
          (http://wbtyp.net/65), WhatTheFont! (http://wbtyp.net/87) and Matcherator
          (http://wbtyp.net/67).
      4   Nina Stössinger on designing FF Ernestine (http://wbtyp.net/32).
                                                               Building a library   288




Be careful with free. While developing a professional typeface is time-
consuming, completing the basic design can be a matter of weeks. Often
that’s the point at which a free font is released, bereft of useful character
sets, different weights, proper italic, accurate spacing, kerning, ligatures or
hinting. Even some free fonts available from large, otherwise professional
distributors, will be rather unfinished. Caveat emptor: you’ll need to pay for
free with additional testing.


Typomania is incurable but not lethal
Typophilia is love of type. If you are hoping – or have already started – to
build your own type library, then you are already affected by typophilia.
This will inevitably lead to typomania, a word affectionately coined by Erik
Spiekermann. This is a state of being where you see type everywhere, when
you mentally try to label every typeface you see and are inadvertently lost
in its use and misuse. Typomania is a harmless but incurable disease of the
mind, shared by many sufferers who enjoy nothing more than to geek about
kerning, terminals, counters and cuts. You have been warned. Welcome to
the club!
§ Final
  Thoughts




 • Communicating your design
 • If you read nothing else, read this
   ¶ It is only with practice that you
  can become truly accomplished as a
typographer, but a good set of guidelines
      can help you along the way.
291   Communicating your design




      Communicating
      your design

      Web typography is complex, intricate, detailed and time-
      consuming. If the fine details you have agonised over in your
      design are not communicated effectively from designer to
      developer, then all that effort will be for nothing.


      If you have followed the advice in this book, you will have created a respon-
      sive prototype. This both illustrates and demonstrates the typography in a
      browser, providing you with an invaluable communication tool. Under the
      hood of your prototype will be CSS, which – if coded and commented well –
      can potentially be the ultimate typography specification. If your prototype
      is a comprehensive collection of all your typographic decisions, then its
      CSS will contain all the necessary dimensions, values and proportions of
      your typesetting, including how it should respond to different viewports.
      In theory, a developer could refer to your CSS for everything they need to
      know about the typographic system you have designed.
          The aforementioned developer may, of course, be you (as designer-
      developer), but not all designers can or need to code. Designing and devel-
      oping can be a partnership, a symbiotic relationship that frees the designer
      from shortcomings in their coding ability, and the developer from any
      limits to their design sensibilities. If lucky enough to be in a partnership
      situation, you will probably need the modern equivalent of what Erik
      Spiekermann termed a typogram1.
          A typogram comprehensively lists all the details of any part of your
      typographic scheme. The figure shows an entire page of notes describing
      the precise setting of body text in a book, including typeface, size, line
      spacing, letterspacing, margins, justification and hyphenation settings.



      1   In Rhyme & Reason: A Typographic Novel by Erik Spiekermann (1987).
                                                                    Communicating your design   292




A typogram as featured in Rhyme & Reason: A Typographic Novel by Erik Spiekermann.


If you are not writing CSS yourself to fully demonstrate and document your
design, you will need to list every single detail of the type and its setting.
Software can help you with this. For example, there’s an open source plug-in
for Sketch called Sketch Measure2 which enables your design to be interac-
tively inspected element by element.

2   Sketch Measure (http://wbtyp.net/75) plug-in for Sketch.
293   Communicating your design




      Your best bet, though, is a living style guide3, a continually updated web-
      site containing component patterns, type specifications, page layouts,
      samples and, often, front-end code. Website style guide resources, includ-
      ing dozens of live examples, can be found at Website Style Guide Resources
      (http://wbtyp.net/88).




      A small extract from the Co-op Design Manual showing type sizes, line heights and margins.


      It is your job to communicate your design in the most detailed and usable
      way you can for the situation you find yourself in. This aspect is as impor-
      tant as any other, because without it your work up until now will be missed,
      misinterpreted or mislaid. Your job is to honour the text and put your reader
      at ease. Communicating your solution to that is the final step of the journey.



      3   For example: ‘Typography’ (http://wbtyp.net/13), Co-op Design Manual.
                                                If you read nothing else, read this   294




If you read
nothing else,
read this

Wherever there is type, there is typography; and where there is
typography, it’s the little things that count.

The way type is set – whether good or bad, with care or little thought –
always says something about the text. The legibility of the words, the ease
with which they can be read, and the scene set by the choice of typeface,
all combine to create your reader’s experience.
    Typography is just that – the design of the reading experience. It is
a craft which, perhaps more than any other discipline, encompasses the
notion of the whole being greater than the sum of the parts. The details we
strive to get right are frequently mundane and seemingly trivial, and yet,
when taken together, can elevate an experience from tiresome to delightful.
    The very best typographers share a number of traits. Good taste and a
sense of the aesthetic are chief among them, although these must be tem-
pered by humility in their work. An eye for detail and aptitude for rigour
will ensure the work is done, and done right. But a typographer must be
willing to learn. No one is born with an innate mastery of typography. There
are rules and conventions whose causes and effects we only get to under-
stand and appreciate over time. Books like this one attempt to collate some
of that understanding, but it is only with practice that a typographer can
become truly accomplished. On that note, here is one final piece of advice.

Don’t trust computers
Or rather, don’t trust browser defaults – use your own judgement. If you
know what good work looks like (and hopefully you will after reading this
book), you’ll do good work. In an interview in 1998, design writer Steven
Heller expressed this splendidly:
295   If you read nothing else, read this




          If you have never done design or typography any other way than by computer,
          your entire thinking can be structured by what the computer will do so easily.
          It’s bad in typography because many people believe that if the computer
          spaced it, it must be right. A typographer can’t live with that.

      If you find yourself using a browser’s default value for text size, or line
      spacing, or width, or margin, or colour, or any other value affecting your
      design, then question it. It may be fine. It may be just off, or it may be
      entirely inappropriate.


      Guidelines
      This book is written as a series of guidelines. As you grow more experienced,
      you may find yourself ignoring and contravening this guidance. That’s fine.
      These are not rules and you should not take them as such. But if you do
      work around these guidelines, do so knowingly and with good reason.

      We are all Typographers
      •   Good typography induces a good mood 4
      •   Learn to relinquish control 7
      •   Know what you are designing and for whom 8
      •   Honour the text, don’t dominate it 8

      Setting Type to be Read
      •   We read in hops, skips and jumps… and pauses 12
      •   Use rems for global sizing; use ems for local sizing 17
      •   Choose a comfortable measure 22
      •   Lean on six centuries of typesetting experience 22
      •   Set text for mobile first 23
      •   Use a liquid setting 24
      •   Use the default font size for paragraphs 26
      •   Take small print into account 27
      •   Adjust the font size if the typeface requires it 27
      •   Use rems to size your text 31
      •   Line height should suit text size and measure 34
      •   Use unitless values to set line-height 37
      •   Increase line spacing from the browser default 39
      •   Adapt the line spacing to suit the typeface 39
      •   Justify well or not at all; if in doubt, align left 43
      •   Don’t justify the final line of a paragraph 47
                                              If you read nothing else, read this   296




•   Don’t justify without hyphenating 48
•   Hyphenate judiciously and with care 51
•   Limit the number of consecutive hyphenated lines 52
•   Limit the word length and the number of characters before and after
    a hyphen 52
•   Reduce hyphenation by setting a hyphenation zone 54
•   Avoid leaving the stub of a hyphenated word as the last line of a
    paragraph 56
•   Don’t centre long passages of text 56
•   Adapt your design to the reading context 57
•   Use ems rather than pixels to determine the screen width 58
•   Adjust type size according to reading distance 59
•   Calculate text sizes for different devices 60
•   Keep your big text under control 62
•   Beware of the tablet problem 62
•   Test your design in a responsive prototype 63
•   Stepping back and squinting are no substitute for reading 63

Typographic Detail
•   There is more than one space 67
•   If a word has an accent, use it 68
•   Pay particular attention to accented names 69
•   Use the appropriate punctuation marks 70
•   Don’t use a hyphen instead of a dash 70
•   In running text use a proper minus 72
•   Use a division symbol rather than a slash 72
•   Use proper and appropriate quotation marks and apostrophes 72
•   Don’t use italic brackets 73
•   Don’t overuse or over-elaborate ampersands 73
•   Use UTF-8 in preference to entities 75
•   Automate character substitution whenever possible 76
•   Use standard ligatures for improved legibility 78
•   Hide legacy OpenType support from modern browsers 81
•   Use alternative ligatures judiciously 83
•   Use real small caps 84
•   Establish the structure up front 87
•   Don’t rely on size alone for differentiation 87
•   Always size type using a scale 87
•   Choose your smallest size first 91
•   Use alternative modular scales to suit the content 91
297   If you read nothing else, read this




      •   Adjust the text size and scale for different screens 93
      •   Take screen height into account 95
      •   Establish the semantics up front 96
      •   Tighten up leading in headings 98
      •   Avoid clash (unless it’s a deliberate choice) 98
      •   Mark the opening of each passage of text 98
      •   Implement drop caps accurately or not at all 99
      •   A standfirst should stand first 102
      •   Demarcate paragraphs appropriately 103
      •   Indent paragraphs at least 1 em 104
      •   Separate paragraphs by no more than 1 em 104
      •   Don’t use stylised paragraph breaks without good reason 104
      •   Not all block quotes need to look like pull-quotes 106
      •   Hang punctuation 106
      •   Treat lists as text to be read 108
      •   Avoid using using underlines for emphasis 109
      •   Avoid faux bolds and italics 110
      •   Make links clear but unobtrusive 114
      •   Use old-style numerals in running text 119
      •   Use lining numerals in headings 121
      •   Use proper subscripts and superscripts 122
      •   Reference notes with superscripts 125
      •   Show footnotes in context 126
      •   Set tables as text to be read 127
      •   Don’t stretch tables 128
      •   Keep table furniture and fills to a minimum 128
      •   Left-align text, right-align numbers, and align headings with data 130
      •   Align to the decimal point 131
      •   Use tabular lining numerals in tables of numbers 132
      •   Put white space to work to group and separate 133
      •   Do not over-stylise tables 136
      •   Adapt tables to small screens 139
      •   Consider setting oblique headings to save space 139
      •   Let the browser handle tables with horizontal scrolling 140
      •   Linearise simple tables into lists 142
      •   Make tables responsive according to their purpose 143
      •   Kern your text to improve readability 145
      •   Letterspace your text rarely and carefully 147
      •   Don’t letterspace lowercase without good cause 148
      •   Letterspace all strings of capitals and all long strings of digits 148
                                                If you read nothing else, read this   298




•   Eliminate erroneous spaces after last letters 149
•   Gently tighten big, bold and wide fonts 150
•   Turn off ligatures if increasing letterspacing 151
•   Set text at display sizes, even on small screens 152
•   Resize display text as you would an image 154
•   Attend to wide, shallow screens 159
•   Pay attention to the shape of the text 161
•   Visually centre text or hang punctuation 162
•   Prevent widows in headings 164
•   Adjust line spacing for evenness of colour 164
•   Make the most of a font’s hidden gems 165
•   Seek out OpenType features 169
•   Apply vertical space in measured intervals 171
•   Use a basic reset to ensure consistency 172
•   Allow embedded media to break the rhythm 174
•   Don’t slavishly follow a baseline grid 175
•   Design layouts from the content out 177
•   Adopt a mobile-first philosophy 178
•   Stage the main text block for scanning 179
•   Bring the design into the margins 180
•   Use active white space 182
•   Show relationships and draw attention 183
•   Use compound grids for maximum flexibility 188
•   Choose odd over even grid systems 189
•   Restrict column length to the viewport height 190

Choosing and Using Fonts
•   Accept the limits of screen resolution 195
•   Understand how fonts render on screens 196
•   Accept rendering differences between platforms 199
•   Don’t disable subpixel rendering except when text is reversed out 201
•   Check your type across platforms 202
•   Don’t jump straight into choosing fonts 203
•   Understand the purpose and requirements 204
•   Use a typeface with the necessary characters 204
•   Make sure your typeface has the requisite styles 205
•   Choose fonts with the features and special effects you require 206
•   Consider your fonts’ performance 206
•   Work within your means, but be wary of free 207
•   Be pragmatic in the face of branding requirements 208
299   If you read nothing else, read this




      •   Learn how to describe typefaces 213
      •   Type genres are more useful than classifications 218
      •   Know your history 219
      •   Understand type categories 222
      •   Remove the friction between reader and text 237
      •   Choose robust faces for better readability on screens 237
      •   Choose active texture and even colour for a smoother read 238
      •   Choose faces in keeping with the text 240
      •   There’s no such thing as a neutral typeface 242
      •   Choose a face whose history and culture resonates with the text 242
      •   Do some detective work 243
      •   Make a specimen to reduce your shortlist 243
      •   Judge typefaces in context 245
      •   Trust your personal preference 245
      •   Don’t be reverential, dogmatic or ordinary 246
      •   Influence the way people feel through type 246
      •   Favour personalities over flexibility 251
      •   Use display styles for display text 252
      •   Choose display faces that reinforce the structure of the text face 253
      •   Keep inspired, and play 255
      •   Clearly distinguish functional text from body text 256
      •   Choose open, distinct letterforms for functional text 257
      •   Combine typefaces for a reason 262
      •   Start your combination with an anchor typeface 263
      •   Find typefaces that complement the anchor 263
      •   Combine typefaces with similar structure and form 263
      •   Find complements through contrast 265
      •   Stick with a single type family 265
      •   Consider pairing typefaces from the same designer 267
      •   Pair typefaces from the same foundry 268
      •   Don’t specify local fonts without due diligence 271
      •   Reduce your payload 272
      •   Limit the number of fonts you use 272
      •   Always provide a WOFF2 option 272
      •   Subset as much as you can, but no more 273
      •   Optimise page render timing 273
      •   Avoid the flash of invisible text 273
      •   Use font-display to tailor browsers’ behaviour 274
      •   Preload the critical font 275
      •   Fine-tune your web font strategy with font events 276
                                              If you read nothing else, read this   300




•   Load web fonts asynchronously 277
•   Choose the best fallbacks 277
•   Adjust fallback font size to match x-height 278
•   Develop your own taste and preferences 285
•   Steal inspiration, don’t copy 286
•   Get what you pay for, and pay for what you get 287
•   Typomania is incurable but not lethal 288
§ Appendices




 • Glossary
 • Bibliography and further reading
 • CSS index
 • Thank you
303   Glossary




      Glossary
      Active white space. Use of white space to frame text blocks, highlight
      elements and lead your reader from one aspect to another.

      Aliased text. Aligning pixels precisely to a pixel grid so that pixels are
      turned on or off. See rasterisation and compare with anti-aliased text.

      Anti-aliased text. Font smoothing to improve accuracy of rasterisation
      by partly dimming pixels whenever part of a pixel falls inside a font
      vector outline. See rasterisation and compare with aliased text.

      Aperture. The opening of a partially enclosed part of a letter such as n,
      C, S, the lower part of e, and the upper part of a double-storey a.

      Arcminute. A measure of an angle, equal to one sixtieth of a degree.

      Arm. A stroke which joins a stem somewhere in the middle. A letter k
      has two such arms.

      Ascender. A stem on some lowercase letters, such as h and b, that
      extends above the x-height.

      Aspect value. The relative height of lowercase letters to their uppercase
      counterparts; more precisely, the x-height of a font divided by the font size.

      ATypI. Association Typographique International. An international non-
      profit organisation representing the worldwide type and typography
      community and industry. Holds a conference in a different global city
      each year.

      Axis. An imaginary line drawn from top to bottom of a glyph giving
      an indication of the angle at which a nibbed pen would be held to draw
      the letterform.

      Baseline. An imaginary line on which the letters in a font appear
      to rest.

      Bicameral. A script whose letters have both majuscule and minuscule
      forms; that is, uppercase and lowercase letters.

      Body text. The main text of a page.
                                                                    Glossary   304




Bowl. The curved line which fully encloses part of a letter such as d, b, o,
D and B. Compare with counter, which is the interior space created when
a bowl is drawn.

Bracket. A curved or wedge-like connection between a serif and the
main stroke or stem.

Breakpoint. A screen width set in a media query used to trigger a
different style sheet at the point the design would otherwise break.

Cap height. The distance from the baseline to the top of the uppercase
letters (not including accents or diacritics).

Chunked text. A style of composition with the skimming reader in
mind, featuring short paragraphs and frequent subheadings.

Clash. What happens when descenders touch or overlap ascenders.

Colour. Typographic colour refers to the density of the texture of a
body of text – the overall blackness of the letterforms en masse against
the background.

Columnar grid. Consists of vertical columns spaced predictably across
a page.

Common ligature. Ligature turned on by default in OpenType and CSS.
Examples include ﬀ ﬁ ﬂ ﬃ and ﬄ.

Compositor. Someone who lays out and typesets a page, particularly
on a letterpress.

Compound grid. Created by combining hierarchical grids and
columnar grids.

Contextual swash. Swashes which are appropriate for the start, middle
or end of words, thus avoiding awkward clashes or gaps. See swash.

Contrast. The degree of difference between the thick and thin strokes
in a glyph. High contrast means there is a big difference between thick
and thin strokes.

Counter. The interior shape, enclosed or partially enclosed, in letters
such as d, o, c and s. Compare with bowl, which is the line drawn to form
a fully enclosed counter.

Crossbar. The usually horizontal stroke across the middle of letters
such as A, H and e.
305   Glossary




      Data-ink. Defined by Edward Tufte as ‘the non-erasable core of the
      graphic’, whereas non-data-ink is the ink used in the graphic, not to
      directly represent data but for scales, labels, fills and edges.

      Data-ink ratio. Defined by Edward Tufte as the proportion of ink that
      is used to present actual data compared to the total amount of ink used
      in the entire graphic.

      Descender. Any part of a lowercase letter that extends below the
      baseline, found in lowercase letters including g, j, p, q and y, and
      occasionally in uppercase letters such as J and Q.

      Diacritic. A mark, such as an accent, added to a letter, often indicating
      a difference in pronunciation.

      Discretionary ligature. Optional ligature used for stylistic purposes.

      Display text. Usually set large, used to grab attention and set a mood.

      DPI. Dots per inch, a way to quantify a printer’s resolution. Compare
      with PPI.

      Drop cap. Dropped capital – a larger than usual letter at the start of a
      paragraph spanning multiple rows downwards. See also raised cap and
      sunken cap.

      Dynamic form. Letterforms with a contrast and structure derived
      from writing with a broad-nibbed pen held at a consistent angle.

      Ear. A decorative flourish usually on the upper right side of a bowl,
      most often found on a lowercase g.

      Ellipsis. … symbol, used to indicate omitted text or to imply
      continuation.

      Em. A distance equal to the font size.

      Em dash. — symbol, 1 em long, typically used to separate phrases,
      indicate dialogue and attribution.

      Em space. A space 1 em wide.

      En. A distance equal to half an em; that is, half the font size.

      En dash. – symbol, 1 en long, typically used to separate phrases and ranges.

      En space. A space 1 en wide.
                                                                    Glossary   306




Endnote. Notes accompanying the main text positioned either at the
end of a chapter or the entire work.

Eye. The counter, or enclosed space, of a lowercase e.

Faux bold. Bold text synthesised from the regular weight.

Faux italic. Italic text synthesised by slanting the roman.

Feature tag. OpenType table providing instructions about how to use
certain glyphs in a font.

Fist. See manicule.

Fixations. Slight pauses in reading eye movement made to see the
letters within words, and occasionally the spaces between them.

Fleuron. Flower-like symbol used for decoration, such as       .

Flow. A mental state in which your reader is absorbed by the text,
unaware of their surroundings, with time flying by unnoticed.

FOIT. Flash of invisible text. The period during which a browser
hides textual content until it can be rendered in the desired web font.
Compare with FOUT.

Font. An individual style such as Gill Sans Bold Condensed. Compare
with typeface.

Footnote. Notes accompanying the main text positioned at the bottom
of the referring printed page.

FOUT. Flash of unstyled text. The period during which a browser
renders textual content in a fallback font until the desired web font is
rendered. Compare with FOIT.

Foveal vision. When lenses in eyes can only focus with total acuity on
a tiny section of the field of vision.

Geometric form. Letterform modelled as if produced by a ballpoint
pen, often with consistent geometric shapes.

Gestalt principles. Design techniques derived from how visual input
is perceived by human beings. In particular, how once we see the whole,
our perception of the individual parts changes.

Glyph. The specific shape, design or representation of a character.
307   Glossary




      Golden ratio. φ (≈1.618) So-called divine number supposedly appearing
      repeatedly in nature and all manner of classical art and architecture.

      Greedy algorithm. A text justification method which only adds space
      between words.

      Hair space. A very narrow space, usually 1/24 em wide, used to prevent
      adjacent characters touching, rather than to provide any significant
      separation.

      Hard space. Synonymous with non-breaking space.

      Hardware pixel. The tiniest full dot a computer screen is capable
      of displaying.

      Hierarchical grid. Organises disparate content by grouping it in
      horizontal modules stacked vertically one after the other.

      Hinting. Instructions in a font file which bend the contours of
      letterforms so that the pixelated letterform represents a more legible
      character.

      Historical ligature. Optional ligature used for historical or stylistic
      purposes.

      Hung quote. Punctuation situated in a margin or indent so the text
      lines up.

      Hyphenation. Splitting of a word across two lines, indicated by a
      hyphen -.

      Hyphenation dictionary. Language-specific rules for how words can
      be hyphenated.

      Hyphenation zone. The maximum amount of unfilled space (before
      justification) that may be left at the end of a line before hyphenation is
      triggered.

      Justification. Spacing of text adjusted so that both sides of a text block
      have an approximately straight edge.

      Kerning. An adjustment of the spacing between two characters to
      reduce unsightliness and the potential for confusion.

      Knuth–Plass. A sophisticated line breaking, justification and
      hyphenation algorithm developed for the TeX typesetting system by
      Donald Knuth and Michael Plass in 1981.
                                                                    Glossary   308




Lachrymal. Teardrop-shaped.

Ladder. Pejorative term for consecutively hyphenated lines, particularly
when there are three or more.

Leading. The spacing between lines of text (pronounced ‘ledding’).

Legibility. The clarity of individual characters and how easily they are
deciphered. Compate with readability.

Letterspacing. See tracking.

Ligature. A single glyph formed by combining two or more characters.

Linear text. Intended for continuous reading, such as books, news
articles and product descriptions

Lining numeral. Full height ‘uppercase’ numbers 0123456789 used in
headings and tabular data.

Link. See neck.

Lobe. An enclosed or partially enclosed counter below the baseline,
most often found in a double-storey g, but also in cursive (handwritten)
styles of letters including p, b and l.

Logical resolution. The screen resolution as reported by a device. For
example, an iPhone 4 tells browsers its screen resolution to be 320 × 480,
even though there are 640 × 960 hardware pixels built into the display.

Loop. See lobe.

Macrotypography. The field of typography concerned with layout and
the bigger picture on the page.

Manicule.         symbol used to bring attention to something.

Measure. The length of a line of text.

Media query. Rules used by browsers to determine whether a style
sheet should be used or not, based on the type of rendering (primarily
either screen or print) and the physical characteristics of a device.

Mobile first. A philosophy of design where the starting point of any
design consideration is for small screens and less capable devices.

Modular grid. A matrix of grid modules (cells) across and down the
page, which can be combined into larger containers.
309   Glossary




      Modular scale. A prearranged set of harmonious proportions which
      have a meaningful foundation.

      Modulation. Modulation is the rate and manner the contrast changes
      within a glyph.

      Monoline. Letterforms drawn with no discernible contrast, meaning all
      strokes are the same width.

      Narrow no‑break space. A narrow non-breaking space, for example
      used to keep initials thinly spaced but always on the same line.

      Neck. The join between two parts of a letter, particularly between the
      bowl and loop of a double-storey g.

      Negative space. White space formed within the shape and extremities
      of a letterform.

      Non‑breaking space. A space which keeps on the same line the two
      words it separates.

      Obelus. ÷ division symbol.

      Oblique. Slanted, optically corrected version of the corresponding roman.

      Old-style numeral. ‘Lowercase’ numbers 0123456789 used in
      running text.

      OpenType. A cross-platform font file format developed jointly by
      Adobe and Microsoft in 1996. Can contain many thousands of characters,
      languages and glyph variations.

      Orphan. A single line left at the bottom of a page or column. Compare
      with widow.

      Orthotypography. The aspect of typography that defines the meaning
      and accepted usage of typographic signs and symbols, in particular
      punctuation.

      Overshoot. Many letters, such as v, overshoot the baseline slightly.
      This gives them optical balance and stops the letters looking like they
      are about to topple over.

      Passive white space. The inherent spacing between words and lines.

      Perceived text size. Measure as an angle to take into account both
      rendered type size and distance from the eye.
                                                                     Glossary   310




Pilcrow. ¶ symbol historically used to indicate a new paragraph.

Pixel. See hardware pixel and reference pixel.

PPI. Pixels per inch, a way to quantify a screen’s resolution. Compare
with DPI.

Primes. � and � � symbols used to indicate feet and inches, minutes and
seconds, and in scientific notation.

Progressive enhancement. A strategy for web design that emphasises
core web page content and functionality first, adding more nuanced and
technically rigorous layers of presentation and features on top of the
content as the user’s browser/internet connection allow.

Pull‑quote. A typographic device used to pull a quote out of the text by
way of an eye-catching snippet.

Ragged left. Right-aligned text.

Ragged right. Left-aligned text.

Raised cap. Large initial letters which align to the baseline of the first
line. See also drop cap and sunken cap.

Rasterisation. The process by which a font file’s vectors are turned into
pixels rendered on a screen or dots from a printer.

Rational form. Letterforms derived from writing with a pointed pen.

Readability. The level of comprehension and visual comfort when
reading typeset material. Compare with legibility.

Reference pixel. A measure of distance on a screen equal to 1/96 of
an inch.

Reference text. Used for consulting and providing discrete pieces of
information, such as glossaries, listings and data tables.

Responsive design. Making designs flexible and adaptable to screens
and devices of all shapes and sizes.

Rivers. Unsightly gaps between words cascading through paragraphs
where spaces between words line up.

Roman. The normal upright form of a typeface.

Root. In web pages, the <html> element.
311   Glossary




      Rule. Line or border drawn between rows and columns.
      Run-in. Changing the style of the first line of an opening paragraph (to
      bold or small caps, for example).
      Saccades. The jumps made by our eyes has they read along a line of
      text in quick movements.
      Serif. A small mark or foot at the end of a stroke. For example, when the
      number 1 or the letter i are drawn with a bar across the bottom, the two
      halves of the bar are serifs. If the serif is joined to the stem by a slight
      flaring out, rather than an abrupt deviation, it is said to be bracketed.
      Setting solid. Text set with no line spacing (line-height of 1).
      Shoulder. The join of a stroke on to the main stem of a glyph, such as
      where the arm of an r joins the vertical stem.
      Sidenote. Notes accompanying the main text positioned in the margin.
      Sloped roman. See oblique.
      Small caps. Specially designed small capital letters, about the same
      height as the x-height of the lowercase letters.
      Soft hyphen. Enables you to tell the browser where a word could be
      broken across two lines. It will not be read out by screen reading software
      and will only be displayed when a word is actually being broken.
      Solid. See setting solid.
      Sort. An individual metal or wood character used in moveable type
      printing presses
      Standard ligature. Synonymous with common ligature.
      Standfirst. A short opening paragraph often used in journalism to set
      the scene or summarise the subsequent article.
      Stem. The main, usually vertical, stroke in a glyph.
      Stress. See axis.
      Stroke. The lines used to form a glyph, particularly when thought of as
      how the letterform would be written or drawn by hand.

      Subpixel anti-aliasing. A form of anti-aliased text which takes
      advantage of the red, green and blue stripes which make up pixels in
      liquid-crystal (LCD) and organic light-emitting diode (OLED) displays.
                                                                    Glossary   312




Subset. The removal of unrequired glyphs from a font to save on
file size.

Sunken cap. Large initial letters which are taller than the first line but
are located on a lower baseline. See also raised cap and drop cap.

Swash. Flamboyant additions to a character, such as an exaggerated
serif, tail or entry stroke

Tabular numerals. Monospaced (equal width) numbers, typically used
in tables and columns of data.

Tail. A stroke on letters such as Q, K and R which descends below the
baseline. When an a has a stroke rising from the stem towards the next
letter, as you might in handwriting, this is also known as a tail.

Terminal. The end of any stroke that doesn’t include a serif. Some
terminals expand into shapes; for example, ball terminals and lachrymal
(teardrop-shaped) terminals.

Text numeral. Synonymous with old-style numeral.

Thin space. A small space character, usually 1/6 em wide.

Titling numeral. Synonymous with lining numeral.

Tittle. Dot on a lowercase i and j.

Tracking. The tightening or loosening of spacing between all the
glyphs in a block of text.

Typeface. A font family – a collection of fonts based on the same
design (as in Gill Sans). Compare with font.

Typogram. Term invented by Erik Spiekermann. A comprehensive list
of all the details of any part of your typographic scheme.

Typomania. Coined by Erik Spiekermann, a state of being where you
see type everywhere, when you mentally try to label every typeface you
see, and are inadvertently lost in its use and misuse.

Typophilia. A love of type.

Variable fonts. Technology introduced in OpenType 1.8 which enables
a single font file to behave like multiple fonts. This is done by defining
variations within the font, which are interpolated along one or more axes.

Viewport. The browser window (sometimes equivalent to the screen).
313   Glossary




      Viewport units. CSS unit of length where a value of 1 is equal to 1% of
      either the viewport width or height as reported in reference pixels.

      Vox-ATypI. Typeface classification system developed by Maximilien
      Vox, modified and adopted by ATypI in 1960.

      Web font. A font file downloaded for the rendering of text in web pages.

      White space. The space between elements in a composition.

      Widow. A single word which drops onto the final line of a heading
      (or any other block of text), or a single line carried over to a new page
      or column. Compare with orphan.

      X-height. The height of the lowercase letters. While x-height does not
      specifically refer to the height of a letter x, the two are usually equal.
                                               Bibliography and further reading   314




Bibliography and
further reading

Books
References in bold were particularly well thumbed in the creation of this
book – consider them essential reading.

• Get Ready for CSS Grid Layout by Rachel Andrew (2016).
• Explorations in Typography: Mastering the Art of Fine Typesetting
  by Carolina de Bartolo with Erik Spiekermann (2011).
• The Typographic Grid by Hans Rudolf Bosshard (1999).
• The Elements of Typographic Style by Robert Bringhurst (2008).
• Combining Typefaces by Tim Brown (2013).
• The Geometry of Type: the Anatomy of 100 Essential Typefaces
  by Stephen Coles (2013).
• An Initiation in Typography by Anne Denastas and Camille Gallet (2006).
• Finer Points in the Spacing & Arrangement of Type by Geoffrey Dowding
  (1995, after 1954 original).
• Inside Paragraphs: Typographic Fundamentals
  by Cyrus Highsmith (2013).
• Detail in Typography by Jost Hochuli (2008).
• Shady Characters by Keith Houston (2013).
• Shaping Text by Jan Middendorp (2012).
• Grid Systems in Graphic Design by Josef Müller-Brockmann (1996, after
  1981 original).
• Responsive Typography by Jason Pamental (2014).
• Typeface: Classic Typography for Contemporary Design by Tamye Riggs.
• The Typographic Desk Reference by Theodore Rosendorf (2009).
• Typography: A Manual of Design by Emil Ruder (1967).
• On Web Typography by Jason Santa Maria (2014).
• Rhyme & Reason: A Typographic Novel by Erik Spiekermann (1987).
• Getting it Right with Type by Victoria Squire (2006).
315   Bibliography and further reading




      • Stop Stealing Sheep & Find Out How Type Works by Erik Spiekermann
        & E. M. Ginger (2000).
      • The New Typography by Jan Tschichold (1995, after 1928 original).
      • Asymmetric Typography by Jan Tschichold (1967, after 1935 original).
      • Type Matters! by Jim Williams (2012).


      Printed periodicals
      •   Baseline magazine.
      •   Circular, annual publication of the Typographic Circle.
      •   Eye magazine.
      •   Grafik magazine.
      •   The Recorder, published by Monotype.
      •   Ultrabold, the journal of St Bride Library.


      Articles and papers
      • ‘A closer look at TrueType hinting’ (http://wbtyp.net/4) by Tim Ahrens
         on the Typekit blog (2010).
      • ‘Reading Design’ (http://wbtyp.net/5) by Dean Allen in A List Apart (2001).
      • ‘A Dao of Web Design’ (http://wbtyp.net/6) by John Allsop in A List
         Apart (2000).
      • ‘CSS Grid, Flexbox And Box Alignment: Our New System For Web Layout’
         (http://wbtyp.net/7) by Rachel Andrew in Smashing Magazine (2016).
      • ‘Font Size and Viewing Distance of Handheld Smart Phones’
         (http://wbtyp.net/8) by Yuliya Bababekova, Mark Rosenfield, Jennifer
         E. Hue, Rae R. Huang in Optometry & Vision Science Vol 88, Issue 7 (2011).
      • ‘Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Typeface’ (http://wbtyp.net/9)
         by Michael Bierut in Design Observer (2007).
      • ‘Dutch Type Design’ (http://wbtyp.net/10) by Peter Biľak in
         Typotheque articles (2004).
      • ‘Best Practices of Combining Typefaces (http://wbtyp.net/11)
         by Douglas Bonneville in Smashing Magazine (2010).
      • ‘Line lengths when reading from a screen’ (http://wbtyp.net/12)
         by Joe Clark (2005).
      • ‘Typography specification’ (http://wbtyp.net/13) in the Co-op Design
         Manual (2017).
      • ‘How physical text layout affects reading from screen’
         (http://wbtyp.net/14) by M.C. Dyson in Behaviour and Information
         Technology 23/6 (2004).
                                              Bibliography and further reading   316




• ‘How We Load Web Fonts Progressively’ (http://wbtyp.net/151)
   by Filament Group.
• ‘Tablesaw’ (http://wbtyp.net/15) responsive table plug-ins
   by Filament Group.
• ‘Responsive Tables’ (http://wbtyp.net/16) by Aaron Gustafson on
   Easy Designs blog (2013).
• ‘Multi-typeface design’ (http://wbtyp.net/17) by Bethany Heck on
   Prototypr.io (2016).
• ‘Experimenting with customizable, retina-pixel underlining’
   (http://wbtyp.net/18) by Gary Hepting on Codepen.
• ‘Introducing OpenType Variable Fonts’ (http://wbtyp.net/19)
   by John Hudson (2016).
• ‘Type classifications are useful, but the commons ones are not’
   (http://wbtyp.net/20) by Indra Kupferschmidt (2012).
• ‘Some type genres explained’ (http://wbtyp.net/21)
   by Indra Kupferschmidt (2016).
• ‘The Aesthetics of Reading’ PDF (http://wbtyp.net/22)
   by Kevin Larson & Rosalind W. Picard (2005).
• ‘Using the System Font in Web Content’ (http://wbtyp.net/23)
   by Myles Maxfield on the Webkit blog (2015).
• ‘A Simpler Page’ (http://wbtyp.net/24) by Craig Mod in A List Apart
   Issue 321 (2011).
• ‘F-Shaped Pattern For Reading Web Content’ (http://wbtyp.net/25)
   by Jakob Nielsen on Nielsen Norman Group (2006).
• ‘The Ultimate Guide To iPhone Resolutions’ (http://wbtyp.net/26)
   from PaintCode.
• ‘Responsive Typography: The Basics’ (http://wbtyp.net/27)
   by Oliver Reichenstein on iA.net (2012).
• ‘Web Design is 95% Typography’ (http://wbtyp.net/28)
   by Oliver Reichenstein on iA.net (2006).
• ‘The Futures of Typography’(http://wbtyp.net/29)
   by Robin Rendle (2017).
• ‘The New Web Typography’(http://wbtyp.net/30)
   by Robin Rendle (2016).
• ‘Variable Fonts’ (http://wbtyp.net/31) on the Responsive Web Design
   podcast (2017).
• ‘The Importance of Being Ernestine’ (http://wbtyp.net/32)
   by Nina Stössinger at TYPO Berlin (2012).
• ‘Is type hinting for screens still relevant?’ (http://wbtyp.net/33)
   thread on TypeDrawers.
317   Bibliography and further reading




      • ‘The Vignelli Canon’ PDF (http://wbtyp.net/34)
         by Massimo Vignelli (2009).
      • ‘The Crystal Goblet, or Printing Should Be Invisible’
         (http://wbtyp.net/35) by Beatrice Warde (1930).
      • ‘Crafting link underlines on Medium’ (http://wbtyp.net/36)
         by Marcin Wichary in Designing Medium (2014).


      Websites
      • A List Apart typography (http://wbtyp.net/37).
      • Alphabettes (http://wbtyp.net/38) – work, commentary and research
        by women in type.
      • Clagnut typography (http://wbtyp.net/39) – Richard Rutter’s blog
        posts on typography.
      • The Elements of Typography Style Applied to the Web
        (http://wbtyp.net/40).
      • I Love Typography (http://wbtyp.net/41).
      • International Society of Typographic Designers
        (http://wbtyp.net/42) (ISTD).
      • Practical Typography (http://wbtyp.net/43) by Matthew Butterick.
      • Professional Web Typography (http://wbtyp.net/44) by
        Donny Truong.
      • Shady Characters (http://wbtyp.net/45) by Keith Houston.
      • Typedia (http://wbtyp.net/46).
      • Typedrawers (http://wbtyp.net/154) community.
      • Typekit blog (http://wbtyp.net/47).
      • Typekit Practice (http://wbtyp.net/48).
      • Type Tasting (http://wbtyp.net/51) with Sarah Hyndman.
      • Typographica (http://wbtyp.net/49) – type reviews, books
        and commentary.
      • Typography.Guru (http://wbtyp.net/153) community.
      • Typography on the Web (http://wbtyp.net/50) – resources
        and references.

      Inspiration
      •   Fonts in Use (http://wbtyp.net/52)
      •   Typeroom (http://wbtyp.net/53)
      •   TypeToken (http://wbtyp.net/54)
      •   Typewolf (http://wbtyp.net/55)
      •   Typ.io (http://wbtyp.net/56)
                                                Bibliography and further reading   318




Tools and reference
•   Aspect value calculator (http://wbtyp.net/57) using font-size-adjust.
•   Aspect value calculator (http://wbtyp.net/58) using ex units.
•   Axis-Praxis (http://wbtyp.net/60) – variable font playground.
•   Can I Use (http://wbtyp.net/61) – browser support for HTML, CSS, etc.
•   Compute aspect value (http://wbtyp.net/59) displaying installed fonts.
•   CSS Tricks (http://wbtyp.net/62).
•   Explorations in Typography DIY (http://wbtyp.net/63).
•   Font Locator (http://wbtyp.net/64) iOS app.
•   Identifont (http://wbtyp.net/65).
•   Matcherator (http://wbtyp.net/67).
•   MegaType (http://wbtyp.net/68) – baseline alignment project.
•   Modular Scale (http://wbtyp.net/69).
•   OpenType features (http://wbtyp.net/71).
•   Quotation marks (http://wbtyp.net/66) on Wikipedia.
•   Quotes & Accents (http://wbtyp.net/70).
•   Responsive typography experiments (http://wbtyp.net/72) using
    face detection.
•   Simple Scale (http://wbtyp.net/73) – modular scale generator.
•   Size Calc (http://wbtyp.net/74).
•   Sketch Measure (http://wbtyp.net/75).
•   State of Webtype (http://wbtyp.net/76) – support for typographic
    features on the web.
•   Typecast (http://wbtyp.net/77) – browser-based typesetting and
    design tool.
•   Type Sample (http://wbtyp.net/78) – tool for identifying and
    sampling web fonts.
•   TypeTester (http://wbtyp.net/79) – online typography editor.
•   Typography Supply (http://wbtyp.net/80) – an inventory of
    typographic tools.
•   University of Oxford Style Guide (http://wbtyp.net/81).
•   W3C advice on language tags in HTML (http://wbtyp.net/82).
•   WCAG 2.0 Technique G183 colour contrast resources
    (http://wbtyp.net/85).
•   Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 (http://wbtyp.net/83).
•   Web Font Specimen (http://wbtyp.net/84).
•   Website Style Guide Resources (http://wbtyp.net/88).
•   WhatFont (http://wbtyp.net/86) – extension and bookmarklet.
•   WhatTheFont! (http://wbtyp.net/87).
319   Bibliography and further reading




      CSS Modules
      • Backgrounds and Borders Level 3 (http://wbtyp.net/90)
      • CSS Level 2 Revision 1 (CSS 2.1) Specification (http://wbtyp.net/89)
      • Display Level 3 (http://wbtyp.net/91)
      • Flexible Box Layout Level 1 (http://wbtyp.net/92)
      • Font Loading Level 3 (http://wbtyp.net/93)
      • Fonts Level 3 (http://wbtyp.net/94)
      • Fonts Level 4 (http://wbtyp.net/95)
      • Grid Layout Level 1 (http://wbtyp.net/96)
      • Inline Layout Level 3 (http://wbtyp.net/97)
      • Media Queries (http://wbtyp.net/98)
      • Multi-column Layout (http://wbtyp.net/99)
      • Selectors Level 3 (http://wbtyp.net/100)
      • Text Decoration Level 3 (http://wbtyp.net/101)
      • Text Level 3 (http://wbtyp.net/102)
      • Text Level 4 (http://wbtyp.net/103)
      • Transforms Level 1 (http://wbtyp.net/104)
      • Values and Units Level 3 (http://wbtyp.net/105)


      Foundries
      •   A2-Type (http://wbtyp.net/106)
      •   Colophon (http://wbtyp.net/107)
      •   Commercial Type (http://wbtyp.net/108)
      •   Dalton Maag (http://wbtyp.net/109)
      •   Darden Studio (http://wbtyp.net/110)
      •   DSType (http://wbtyp.net/111)
      •   Emigre (http://wbtyp.net/112)
      •   Exljbris (http://wbtyp.net/113)
      •   Font Bureau (http://wbtyp.net/114)
      •   FontFont (http://wbtyp.net/115)
      •   Fontsmith (http://wbtyp.net/116)
      •   The Foundry (http://wbtyp.net/137)
      •   Frere-Jones Type (http://wbtyp.net/117)
      •   G-Type (http://wbtyp.net/118)
      •   Hoefler & Co. (http://wbtyp.net/119)
      •   House Industries (http://wbtyp.net/120)
      •   HvD Fonts (http://wbtyp.net/121)
      •   Jeremy Tankard Typography (http://wbtyp.net/122)
      •   Just Another Foundry (http://wbtyp.net/123)
                                                Bibliography and further reading   320




•    Klim Type Foundry (http://wbtyp.net/124)
•    Letters from Sweden (http://wbtyp.net/125)
•    LucasFonts (http://wbtyp.net/126)
•    Mark Simonson Studio (http://wbtyp.net/127)
•    Milieu Grotesque (http://wbtyp.net/128)
•    Mostardesign (http://wbtyp.net/129)
•    OurType (http://wbtyp.net/130)
•    Parachute (http://wbtyp.net/131)
•    Playtype (http://wbtyp.net/132)
•    Positype (http://wbtyp.net/133)
•    PSTL (ps.type) (http://wbtyp.net/134)
•    Rosetta (http://wbtyp.net/135)
•    Sudtipos (http://wbtyp.net/136)
•    Typejockeys (http://wbtyp.net/139)
•    TypeTogether (http://wbtyp.net/138)
•    Typofonderie (http://wbtyp.net/140)
•    Typolar (http://wbtyp.net/141)
•    Typotheque (http://wbtyp.net/142)
•    Underware (http://wbtyp.net/143)
•    VirusFonts (http://wbtyp.net/144)


Links references
All the websites linked to in this book use a custom URL shortener of the
form http://wbtyp.net/n. The full length URLs are listed here in numerical
sequence.

    1. http://book.webtypography.net/
    2. http://clagnut.com/
    3. http://clearleft.com/
    4. https://blog.typekit.com/2010/12/14/a-closer-look-at
        -truetype-hinting/
    5. http://alistapart.com/article/readingdesign
    6. https://alistapart.com/article/dao
    7. https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2016/11/css-grids-flexbox-and-
         box-alignment-our-new-system-for-web-layout/
    8. http://journals.lww.com/optvissci/Fulltext/2011/07000/
         Font_Size_and_Viewing_Distance_of_Handheld_Smart.5.aspx
    9. http://designobserver.com/feature/
         thirteen-ways-of-looking-at-a-typeface/5497
321   Bibliography and further reading




       10. https://www.typotheque.com/articles/dutch_type_design
       11. http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2010/11/04/
             best-practices-of-combining-typefaces/
       12. http://blog.fawny.org/2005/09/21/measures/
       13. https://coop-design-manual.herokuapp.com/styles/typography.html
       14. http://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=%22How+physical+text
             +layout+affects+reading+from+screen%22
       15. https://github.com/filamentgroup/tablesaw
       16. http://blog.easy-designs.net/archives/responsive-tables/
       17. https://blog.prototypr.io/the-value-of-multi-typeface-design
            -ccd67227b0ee
       18. http://codepen.io/ghepting/pen/tLnHK/
       19. https://medium.com/@tiro/12ba6cd2369
       20. http://kupferschrift.de/cms/2012/03/on-classifications/
       21. http://kupferschrift.de/cms/2016/01/type-classification-texts/
       22. http://affect.media.mit.edu/pdfs/05.larson-picard.pdf
       23. https://webkit.org/blog/3709/using-the-system-font-in-web-content/
       24. http://alistapart.com/article/a-simpler-page
       25. https://www.nngroup.com/articles/f-shaped-pattern-reading
            -web-content/
       26. https://www.paintcodeapp.com/news/ultimate-guide-to
            -iphone-resolutions
       27. http://ia.net/blog/responsive-typography-the-basics/
       28. https://ia.net/topics/the-web-is-all-about-typography-period/
       29. https://robinrendle.com/essays/futures-of-typography/
       30. https://robinrendle.com/essays/new-web-of-typography/
       31. http://responsivewebdesign.com/podcast/variable-fonts
       32. http://www.typotalks.com/videos/the-importance-of-being-ernestine/
       33. http://typedrawers.com/discussion/comment/24051/#Comment_24051
       34. http://www.vignelli.com/canon.pdf
       35. http://gmunch.home.pipeline.com/typo-L/misc/ward.htm
       36. https://medium.design/7c03a9274f9
       37. http://alistapart.com/topic/typography-web-fonts
       38. http://alphabettes.com/
       39. http://clagnut.com/archive/typography/
       40. http://webtypography.net/
       41. http://ilovetypography.com/
       42. http://www.istd.org.uk/
       43. http://practicaltypography.com/
       44. https://prowebtype.com/
                                           Bibliography and further reading   322




45. http://www.shadycharacters.co.uk/
46. http://typedia.com/
47. http://blog.typekit.com/
48. http://practice.typekit.com/
49. http://typographica.org/
50. https://typographyontheweb.com/
51. http://typetasting.com/
52. http://fontsinuse.com/
53. http://www.typeroom.eu/
54. http://www.typetoken.net/
55. http://typewolf.com/
56. http://typ.io/
57. http://clagnut.com/sandbox/font-size-adjust.html
58. http://clagnut.com/sandbox/font-size-adjust-ex.html
59. http://brunildo.org/test/fontlist3.html
60. http://www.axis-praxis.org/
61. http://caniuse.com/
62. https://css-tricks.com/
63. http://explorationsintypography.com/diy/
64. https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/font-locator/id582240320?mt=8
65. http://www.identifont.com/
66. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quotation_mark
67. https://www.fontspring.com/matcherator
68. http://www.studiothick.com/essays/web-typography-is-broken
69. http://modularscale.com/
70. http://quotesandaccents.com/
71. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_typographic_features
      #OpenType_typographic_features
72. http://webdesign.maratz.com/lab/responsivetypography/
73. http://simplescale.online/
74. https://sizecalc.com/
75. http://utom.design/measure/
76. http://stateofwebtype.com/
77. http://typecast.com/
78. http://www.typesample.com/
79. https://typetester.org/
80. http://typography.supply/
81. https://www.ox.ac.uk/public-affairs/style-guide
82. https://www.w3.org/International/articles/language-tags/
83. https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/
323   Bibliography and further reading




       84. http://webfontspecimen.com/
       85. https://www.w3.org/tr/WCAG20-TECHS/G183.html
             #G183-resources
       86. http://www.chengyinliu.com/whatfont.html
       87. https://www.myfonts.com/WhatTheFont/
       88. http://styleguides.io/
       89. https://www.w3.org/tr/css2/
       90. https://www.w3.org/tr/css3-background/
       91. https://www.w3.org/tr/css-display-3/
       92. https://www.w3.org/tr/css-flexbox-1/
       93. https://www.w3.org/tr/css-font-loading-3/
       94. https://www.w3.org/tr/css-fonts-3/
       95. https://drafts.csswg.org/css-fonts-4/
       96. https://www.w3.org/tr/css-grid-1/
       97. https://www.w3.org/tr/css-inline-3/
       98. https://www.w3.org/tr/css3-mediaqueries/
       99. https://www.w3.org/tr/css3-multicol/
      100. https://www.w3.org/tr/selectors/
      101. https://www.w3.org/tr/css-text-decor-3/
      102. https://www.w3.org/tr/css-text-3/
      103. https://drafts.csswg.org/css-text-4/
      104. https://www.w3.org/tr/css-transforms-1/
      105. https://www.w3.org/tr/css3-values/
      106. https://www.a2-type.co.uk
      107. https://www.colophon-foundry.org
      108. https://commercialtype.com
      109. https://www.daltonmaag.com/
      110. https://www.dardenstudio.com/
      111. http://www.dstype.com/
      112. http://emigre.com/
      113. http://www.exljbris.com/
      114. http://www.fontbureau.com/
      115. https://www.fontfont.com
      116. http://www.fontsmith.com/
      117. https://frerejones.com/
      118. http://www.g-type.com/
      119. https://www.typography.com/
      120. https://houseind.com/
      121. http://hvdfonts.com/
      122. http://typography.net/
                                            Bibliography and further reading   324




123. http://justanotherfoundry.com/
124. https://klim.co.nz/
125. http://lettersfromsweden.se/
126. http://www.lucasfonts.com/
127. http://www.marksimonson.com/
128. http://www.milieugrotesque.com
129. http://motyfo.com
130. https://ourtype.com
131. http://www.parachutefonts.com/
132. https://playtype.com/
133. https://positype.com/
134. https://pstypelab.com
135. https://www.rosettatype.com/
136. http://sudtipos.com/
137. http://www.foundrytypes.co.uk/
138. http://type-together.com/
139. http://www.typejockeys.com/
140. https://typofonderie.com/
141. http://www.typolar.com/
142. https://www.typotheque.com/
143. http://www.underware.nl/
144. http://virusfonts.com/
145. https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/www-style/2015Jan/0078.html
146. http://jontangerine.com/
147. https://thegreatdiscontent.com/interview/alison-sudol
148. https://css-tricks.com/tag/responsive-tables/
149. https://abookapart.com/products/get-ready-for-css-grid-layout
150. http://nyc.ampersandconf.com/
151. https://www.filamentgroup.com/lab/font-events.html
152. https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/clagnut/
       web-typography-a-handbook
153. https://typography.guru/
154. http://typedrawers.com
325   CSS index




      CSS index

      Index of featured CSS properties and other syntax.

      ::after 107, 163
      ::before 107, 109, 163
      ::first-line 98
      :first-of-type 99, 101
      @font-face 269, 284
      @media 58, 61, 94, 95, 143, 160, 181, 191, 250
      -moz-osx-font-smoothing 201
      @supports 82, 99, 117, 120, 124, 125, 147, 151, 166, 169
      -webkit-font-smoothing 201
      background 102
      background-image 118
      background-size 102
      border-collapse 134
      calc() 158
      caption-side 135
      column-count 190
      column-gap 190, 191
      column-rule 190, 191
      columns 191
      column-width 190, 191
      content 101, 102, 105, 107, 108, 109, 143, 163
      counter-increment 109
      counter-reset 108, 109
      display 105, 143
      font 41, 261
      font-display 274, 277
      font-family 41, 42, 205, 260, 270, 271, 274, 276, 277, 278, 279, 284
      font-feature-settings 81, 82, 83, 84, 120, 122, 125, 133, 147, 151, 167, 283
      font-kerning 147
      font-optical-sizing 283
      font-size 16, 32, 38, 41, 42, 94, 124, 125, 155, 157, 250, 261, 279
                                                                        CSS index   326




font-size-adjust 279
font-smoothing 201
font-stretch 283
font-style 42, 111, 270, 271, 283, 284
font-synthesis 112
font-variant-alternates 166, 168, 169
font-variant-caps 85, 86, 99
font-variant-ligatures 81, 82, 84, 151
font-variant-numeric 120, 122, 133
font-variant-position 123, 124, 125
font-variation-settings 283, 284
font-weight 42, 98, 112, 113, 270, 271, 272, 283, 284
hyphenate-limit-after 54
hyphenate-limit-before 54
hyphenate-limit-chars 53, 54
hyphenate-limit-last 56
hyphenate-limit-lines 52, 54
hyphenation-limit-zone 54
hyphens 51
initial-letter 100, 101
letter-spacing 149, 150, 151, 257
line-height 37, 38, 39, 41, 42, 98, 104, 134, 164, 172, 173, 279, 311
list-style 109
max-width 25, 141, 143, 181
min-height 95, 160, 191
min-width 57, 58, 61, 62, 94, 95, 160, 181, 182, 250
overflow-x 141
quotes 107, 108
text-align 43, 143, 149, 163
text-align-last 47
text-decoration 116, 117
text-decoration-color 117
text-decoration-skip 117
text-decoration-style 117
text-indent 104, 109
text-transform 86, 149
transform 140
transform-origin 140
vertical-align 124, 125, 172, 175
327   Thank you




      Thank you

      This book was over a decade in the making. Over the course of
      that time I have built up a significant debt of gratitude, some of
      which I will now attempt to recognise.

      In 2005, as a frustrated web designer, I published The Elements of Typo-
      graphic Style Applied to the Web (http://wbtyp.net/40) as my attempt at
      applying Robert Bringhurst’s guidelines to the web. My intention was to
      put to bed some of the myths surrounding web typography, and show that
      with a little effort, good typography was perfectly possible on the web.




      Mark Boulton and Richard Rutter at SxSW 2007. Mark Norman Francis


      Two years later, that site led to the SxSW talk Mark eloquently describes in
      the Foreword. Realising we were not alone in believing the web could and
      should be a better place for typography, a book seemed a logical outcome.
                                                                     Thank you   328




The next ten years saw a series of setbacks and competing commitments
which meant our plan to write the book together never saw fruition. In
that time, Mark set up his own publishing company and we seemed set to
go, but Five Simple Steps shut its doors with Mark’s departure to Mono-
type. I decided the book still needed to see the light of day and made a
commitment to write it myself and do the best job I possibly could.
    Knowing the upfront costs required for professional editing, proof-
reading, typesetting and – most of all – printing, I turned to Kickstarter
(http://wbtyp.net/152) to get funding. Evidently, I was successful; in fact,
I reached my funding target after only 48 hours. For that, I owe my biggest
thanks to the trust, generosity and patience of all 699 people who backed
me and this book on Kickstarter. You are listed below.

Without whom
The person responsible for getting me hooked on typography is a talented
designer named Ian Lewis; thank you, Ian, for lending me your copies of
Bringhurst and Dowding. Further thanks go to Mark Boulton and Jon Tan
for helping shape the book. My brother Dave did a fantastic job with the
printed book and many of the illustrations. Owen Gregory was stellar in
his painstaking editing, proofreading and words of support (any errors or
aberrations are entirely my fault).
    Thank you to all my colleagues at Clearleft for your feedback and encour-
agement throughout, and to the wider web and type community for your
help and sharing of knowledge – you are too numerous to name here (which
is wonderful in itself), but hopefully you know who you are. And finally,
thanks to my friend Jason for these words of encouragement from a fellow
typophile and author:

— me: “What kind of an idiot would try to write a book on web
  typography when things keep changing all all the time?”

— jasonsantamaria: “It’s the stupidest thing to do. Except for all
  the other things.”
329   Thank you




      Backers
      Once again, thanks for your trust, generosity, encouragement and patience.
      It is a statement of fact that this book would not have been possible with-
      out you.



                  Kristof Bernaert • Jon Hicks • Jay Kaufmann
                           Stuart Miller • Marc Thiele
           Matt Alcock • Chris Armstrong • Christos Asteriou • Nic Barajas
         Rogier Barendregt • Natanael Bjorkgard • Joshua Bock • Pablo Boerr
         Scott Boms • Emma Boulton • François Bourgaux • Matthew Brown
               Rade Brujic • Jaime Caballero • Chris Cannam • Bea Canut
          Pedro Carrasquilla • Alistair Chisholm • Andy Clarke • Radrad Co
      John F Croston III • Niurka Rodriguez de Fernandez • Jennifer de la Fuente
             Theresa Desfosses • Stuart Fano • Oliver Farrell • Jason Garber
         Mathias Gmeiner • Simon Goumaz • Michael Gravel • David W Gray
            Duncan Gray • Aegir Hallmundur • Tim Harper • Mike Hartley
      Kevin Healy • Luke Hill • Andy Hume • Grant Hutchinson • Elisabeth Irgens
        Dennis J. Jackson II • Marc Jenkins • Serge K. Keller • Jonathan Kempf
        Kerning Conference • Taroh Kogure • Zhifeng Koh • Charlie Langridge
          Simon Law • Yoli Lawrence • Mark Lednor • Chris Lilley • Jeff Long
        Andres Lopez Josenge • Woody MacDuffie • Dan Mall • Chris Marshall
      Niqui Merret • Vitorio Miliano • Ant Miller • David Miller • Fleur Mongan
      David Moulton • Marko Mrdjenovič • Keith Mutch • Marcel Maurice Naef
             Jamie Neely • Sebastian Nikolaus • John Norris • Anya Ohmai
      John Oxton-King • Nick Page • Jason Pamental • Grant Pan • Jackie Parkin
      Doc Parsons • Cole Peters • David Randall • Marco Reisner • Dan Richmond
           Stu Robson • David Roessli • Derek A. Rosenstrauch • Craig Saila
       Wade Sakundiak • Jason Santa Maria • Joel Santiago • Jorren Schauwaert
         Christopher Schmitt • Alex Sexton • Peter Simpson • Dennis Skelton
        Matthias Slovig • Vincent Smedinga • Matthew Smith • Andy Spencer
            Bevan Stephens • Terin Stock • Greg Storey • Rachel Thompson
               Fabio Venni • Dylan Walsh • Trent Walton • Tiffany Wardle
                Samantha Warren • Ludwig Wendzich • Jeremy Whitbred
                  Michelle Whitman • Yassir Yahya • Jeremy J. Zahner
                                                                       Thank you   330




         Marius Aabel • Alexandra Aas • Matthijs Abeelen • Jeremy Abrams
      Philipp Acsany • Filip S. Adamsen • Georg S. Adamsen • Ire Aderinokun
    Charles Adler • Cédric Aellen • Steven Ametjan • Artem Aminov • Anarore
        Rachel Andrew • Josh Apostolopoulos • Fred Aragao • Alberto Arias
  Marta Armada • Ben Armstrong • Ari Arsyadi • Andrew Austin • James Aylett
      Pete Aylward • Derik Badman • Stephen Baggs • D. Bailey • Jasper Bakker
André Baldinger • Joel Bardsley • Matthew Barger • David Barker • Michael Barlow
Mike Barmonde • Steve Barnett • Jim Barraud • Sander Baumann • Matthew Beech
        Sami Beese • Andy Bell • Cory Bennett • Julian Benton • Jason Birnie
Ashley Bischoff • Stefan Boehm • Timo Bontenbal • Jonas Boserup • Lorenzo Bovini
         Matthew Boyd • Myles Braithwaite • Nick Bramwell • Ralph Brandi
   Charlie Briggs • Florian Brinkmann • Jim Brittain • Brad Brooks • Tim Brown
         Sarah Bryant and David Allen • Matthew Buchanan • Nat Buckley
Michael Bundscherer • James Burt • Doru Calangea • Nick Caldwell • Jonas Calvo
  Ian Cameron • Eric Campos • Graham Carlyle • Ann Carrier • Timothy Carroll
    Christopher Cashdollar • Katrina Cass • Jeremy Champion • Roinson Chan
Alex Chang • Kevin Chang • Justin Charles • Sylvain Charpiot • John R Chennells
  Ready Chi • Frank Chimero • Hannah Cho • Shaun Choh • Stephanie A. Chuah
         Adam Churchill • Nikki Clark • Michael Clayton • Stephen Collins
 Timothy Conroy • Katy Coope • Charles Cooper • Joe Corcoran • Katherine Cory
   Jérôme Coupé • Andy Cowan • Simon Cox • Joshua Crane • Alexandra Crasqi
 Andy Croll • Andrew Crookston • Chip Cullen • Pedro Custódio • Simon Cutajar
Azlan Cuttilan • Martin Dady • David Darke • Ian Dash • Nac Datta • Andy Davies
      Adam Dawkins • Johan de Koning • Davy De Pauw • Mark De Solla Price
         Randall De Weerd • Hans de Wolf • Pablo Defendini • Jed Dela Cruz
        Marissa Demers • Andy Dennis • Remko Dijksma • Covington Doan
       Graham Dobie • Jordan Robert Dobson • Ben Doherty • Benjamin Dong
       Luke Dorny • Paul Downey • Matias Doyle • Joel Drapper • Ryan Duffy
  Patrick Dugan • Seb Duggan • Alistair Duggin • Marko Dugonjic • Ben Duguid
 Tom Dunn • Mark Durbin • Ali Edin • Alex Edwards • Sylvia Egger • Eric Eggert
     Johannes Ekman • Jacob Ela • John Ellis • Emanuel Eriksson • Miguel Espi
  Adriano Esteves • Guillermo Esteves • Eric Evans • Nigel Ewan • Ana Ferreira
       Marc Fini • David Finnegan • Sean Fitzpatrick • Levi Flair • Travis Fleck
  Christian Flindt • Casey Forbes • Nathan Ford • Travis Forden • Goncalo Forte
      Aurélien Foutoyet • Mark Norman Francis • Dan Freeman • Martin Freer
      Jasmine Rae Friedrich • Ville Frisk • Michael Fruehmann • Jitachi Garcia
     Andy Gardner • Mike Garrett • Joel Gerhold • Rae Gibbs • Sebastian Gilits
     Kyle Gillen • Jean-Marc Giorgi • Mark Glassford • Jon Gold • Robert Golias
 Mart Gordon • Mike Gowen • Graeme • Lee Graham • Steve Graham • Vojta Grec
331   Thank you




           John Griffiths • Scott Gruber • Yannick Guti • Gilbert Guttmann • Celeste H
       Maximilian Haack • Ken Haase • Brooke Hamilton • Matt Hamm • Edd Hannay
          Andy Hansen • Peter Bo Hansen • Kiel Hanson • Tim Harbour • Chad Harris
                Simon Harriyott • Marc Hartwig • Jake Harvey • Brendan Hastings
          Michael Hastrich • Andy Hawkes • Stephen Hay • Tom Hazledine • Val Head
                Krystyn Heide • Erwin Heiser • Rafael Hernandez • Ralf Herrmann
           Mike Hickman • Matt Hill • Kim Hjortholm • Sven Hoehn • Peter Hofmann
              Joan Højberg • Helen V. Holmes • Jonathan Holst • George B Hopkins
            Matt Hornsby • Evey Huang • David Hughes • Chris Hurst • Peter Imhoff
        Piotr Ingling • Zach Inglis • Borna Izad • DJ Jahn • Jaffry Jalal • Matthew James
          Rob James • Rock Jethwa • Zachary Jewell • Are Johannessen • Sean Johnson
             Mark Joint • Elias Jones • David Joseph • Michael Jovel • Giovanni Jubert
           Nina K • Peter Kaizer • Kuku Kaka • Kake • Laura Kalbag • Boril Karaivanov
              Noah Kardos-Fein • Joshua Katigbak • Karl Kaufmann • Éric Kavanagh
        Micky Kelleher • Patrick Kelley • Scott Kellum • Collin Kelly • Peter Kennaugh
           John Keyes • Chu Kin Shing • Grant Kindrick • Galen King • Howard Kistler
               Chris Korhonen • Joni Korpi • John Kosinski II • Jan-Paul Koudstaal
       Dave Kraayeveld • Akarawut Kraikhojornkiti • Jason Kunesh • Mark Kunzmann
       Lloyd Kupchanko • Indra Kupferschmid • David Kusiak • Ben Kutil • Giulia Laco
          Madeleine Lamou • Frode Lamøy • V Lau • Christian Lawrence • Dan Layton
      Joey Leech • Phil Leitch • Andy LeMay • David Lemon • Gerry Leonidas • Tim Lewis
            Stanley Lim • Jon Linklater-Johnson • Caren Litherland • Tom Livingston
        Paul Lloyd • Tracy Locke Castro • Dan London • Chris Lowe • Martin Lundberg
      Erin Lynch • Kirsten M • Matt Machell • Dannell Macilwraith • Jeanie Mackinder
             James Madson • Ricardo Magalhães • Alex Magill • Dominic Magnifico
         Barry Mahaffey • Diego Maldonado • Amer Mall • Chris Manvell • Yiran Mao
            Carina Marano • Michael Marcialis • Dominic Marcinkus • Fabien Marry
         J D Marsters • Scott Martin • Eric Martz • Frederic Marx • Simon Maslaveckas
      A. J. May • Nick McFarlane • Christina McGuire • Lenore McLean • Drew McLellan
        Mark McLoughlin • Matteo Menapace • Ryan Merrill • Monica Messaggi Kaya
       Woodie Milano • Mark Mitchell • Marc Mitrani • Stuart Moffatt • William Mon
          Alexander Moore • Chris Moore • Kevin Moran • Oskar Rough Mosumgaard
               Sarah Munt • Raul Murciano • Christopher Murphy • Cheryl Murray
        Julien Musluk • Stig Morten Myre • Andreas Nebiker • Nick Ng • Linh Nguyen
              Jörgen Nilsson • Lauri Niva • Ji Noh • Mary Nolan • Andreas Nymark
             Tibor チビカ Obert • Ivan Odbratt • Knight of Words • Dominik Ogilvie
                Hans Olav Elsebo • António Ornela • Tracy Osborn • Jack Osborne
      Johan Oskarsson • Oscar Palmér • andy parker • Benjamin Parry • Serina Patterson
          James Pellizzi • Christian Petersen • Luc Pettett • Pinnemouche Studio SPRL
           Lauren Plews • Geoff Pollard • Anders Pollas • Cobey Potter • David Powers
                                                                       Thank you    332




      Ryan Price • Shawn Price • Volker Probst • Adam Procter • Martin Pulec
    Rowdy Rabouw • Markus Rademacher • Apiram Raengpradub • Alan Ralph
David Rapson • Sara Regan • Ariëlla F. Reinders • Matthew Reynolds • Micah Rich
   Kaj Rietberg • Dan Ritz • Susan Robertson • Olivia Rohan • François Romain
 Alexa Roman • Jennifer Rourke • Steve Rowling • Martin Ruston • Daniel Ryan
  Leanda Ryan • Ben S • Daniel Sabino de Souza • Gurur Sarbanoglu • Ben Sauer
     Richard Saunders • Rob Sawkins • Yannick Schall • Michael Schlierbach
  Prisca Schmarsow • Ivy Scholz • Rik Schreurs • Vivian Schung • Pete Schuster
   Auyok Sean • Eric Semling • Ben Seymour • Kerem Shefik • Benna Shelanski
Michael Shields • Jonathan Sick • Jason Sidoryn • N Silas Munro • Josh Silverman
Yvonne Sim • Dean Simons • Jason Skaare • David Sky • Justin Slack • Matt Slack
Philip Slesarev Levin • David Smith • David Smith • Steve Smith • Jonathan Snook
       Manuel Muñoz Solera • Jessica Spengler • Andy Staple • Bram Stein
Carsten Stemmler • Dom Stevens • Ron Stewart • Sergey Storchay • Dudley Storey
 Jonas Strandell • Nathan Strange • Max Strebel • Yancey Strickler • Jason Stuart
Jeremy Stucki • Brian Suda • Matt Sugihara • Neil Summerour • Graeme Sutherland
Takeru Suzuki • Ólafur Sverrir Kjartansson • Craig Swanson • Ian Tadashi Moore
     Peter Tait • Kevin Tamura • Tuija Tarkiainen • Mike Taylor • Robin Taylor
        Max Temkin • Hasso Tepper • George Terezakis • Yorick Terweijden
Lee Theobald • Todd Thille • Gareth Thomas • Scott Thomas • Adrian Thompson
    David Thompson • Rick Thurston • Martin Tiefenthaler • Matthew Tobiasz
 Brian Townsend • Andrew Travers • Donny Truong • Eric Tsai • Simo Tuominen
       David Turner • Luděk Uiberlay • Gerrit van Aaken • Dieter van Baarle
 Rex Dylan van Coller • Ted van der Togt • Gertjan van Heertum • Steven Van Loy
Tom VanAntwerp • Angie Vandenbergh • Thomas Vander Wal • Johan Vandewalle
    Hans Verschooten • Jitendra Vyas • Bjorn W • Paul Wagner • Trevin Wagner
Clive Walker • Nathan Walker • Thomas Wallace • Chengpeng Wang • Tony Wareck
Peter Warman • Brian Warren • David Watson • Luke Watts • Tristan Watts-Willis
 Denise Weatherburn • Brad Weaver • Harry Weihe • Sebastian Werner • Jon West
  Rob Weychert • Craig Whyte • Marc Wiesenthal • Richard Wiggins • Joe Wilde
     Spencer Williams • Steffan Williams • Darrell Wilson • Richard Winchell
 Tom Windsor • Aaron Wolf • Wong Ken Ming • Heetaek Woo • K. David Woolley
    Gail Wooten-Votaw • Yan Yan • Hermit Yang • Hsin-You Yeh • Emily Young
                       Melina Zerbib • Zero Agency • Yu Zhou
                    Dedication


   This book is dedicated to my wife Wendy and
         my children Gracie and Laurence.

 I’ll be forever grateful for their unstinting support
and understanding while I sacrificed quality family
time to indulge myself in the two year undertaking
                 that this book became.
 Typography is what comes between the author and the reader.
 This is as true on the web as it is in any other medium. If a text has
 anything at all significant to say, it needs a typographer’s care, which
 will in turn be repaid by the reader’s attention. If you design websites
 or use CSS then you are a typographer whether you know it or not.

 This book is a practical guide and companion reference to all aspects
 of typography on the web. It deftly combines implementation details
 with typographic theory, and is ideal for designers, developers and
 anyone else involved in the process of creating a website.




“It’s THE book to buy. Stunning. An instant classic.”
 — Andy Clarke, author of Hardboiled CSS

“Very useful.”
 — Erik Spiekermann

“Looks great, reads well, full of insight, deep knowledge and expertise.
 If you design the web, you’ll need it.”

“a pleasure to read, insightful and informative”

“a joy to read, so much nice detail”

“a great resource”

 — Reviews across the web




                                                         Ampersand Type, Brighton, UK, 2017
                                                                isbn: 978-0-9956642-0-3
