Building Machine Learning
  Powered Applications
    Going from Idea to Product

      Emmanuel Ameisen
Building Machine Learning Powered Applications
by Emmanuel Ameisen
Copyright © 2020 Emmanuel Ameisen. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North,
Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional
use. Online editions are also available for most titles (http://oreilly.com). For
more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-
9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.

        Acquisitions Editor: Jonathan Hassell

        Development Editor: Melissa Potter

        Production Editor: Deborah Baker

        Copyeditor: Kim Wimpsett

        Proofreader: Christina Edwards

        Indexer: Judith McConville

        Interior Designer: David Futato

        Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery

        Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest

        February 2020: First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
        2020-01-17: First Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781492045113 for release
details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Building
Machine Learning Powered Applications, the cover image, and related trade
dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
The views expressed in this work are those of the author, and do not represent
the publisher’s views. While the publisher and the author have used good faith
efforts to ensure that the information and instructions contained in this work are
accurate, the publisher and the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or
omissions, including without limitation responsibility for damages resulting
from the use of or reliance on this work. Use of the information and instructions
contained in this work is at your own risk. If any code samples or other
technology this work contains or describes is subject to open source licenses or
the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsibility to ensure that
your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.
978-1-492-04511-3
[LSI]
Preface

The Goal of Using Machine Learning Powered
Applications
Over the past decade, machine learning (ML) has increasingly been used to
power a variety of products such as automated support systems, translation
services, recommendation engines, fraud detection models, and many, many
more.
Surprisingly, there aren’t many resources available to teach engineers and
scientists how to build such products. Many books and classes will teach how to
train ML models or how to build software projects, but few blend both worlds to
teach how to build practical applications that are powered by ML.
Deploying ML as part of an application requires a blend of creativity, strong
engineering practices, and an analytical mindset. ML products are notoriously
challenging to build because they require much more than simply training a
model on a dataset. Choosing the right ML approach for a given feature,
analyzing model errors and data quality issues, and validating model results to
guarantee product quality are all challenging problems that are at the core of the
ML building process.
This book goes through every step of this process and aims to help you
accomplish each of them by sharing a mix of methods, code examples, and
advice from me and other experienced practitioners. We’ll cover the practical
skills required to design, build, and deploy ML–powered applications. The goal
of this book is to help you succeed at every part of the ML process.

Use ML to Build Practical Applications
If you regularly read ML papers and corporate engineering blogs, you may feel
overwhelmed by the combination of linear algebra equations and engineering
terms. The hybrid nature of the field leads many engineers and scientists who
could contribute their diverse expertise to feel intimidated by the field of ML.
Similarly, entrepreneurs and product leaders often struggle to tie together their
ideas for a business with what is possible with ML today (and what may be
possible tomorrow).
This book covers the lessons I have learned working on data teams at multiple
companies and helping hundreds of data scientists, software engineers, and
product managers build applied ML projects through my work leading the
artificial intelligence program at Insight Data Science.
The goal of this book is to share a step-by-step practical guide to building ML–
powered applications. It is practical and focuses on concrete tips and methods to
help you prototype, iterate, and deploy models. Because it spans a wide range of
topics, we will go into only as much detail as is needed at each step. Whenever
possible, I will provide resources to help you dive deeper into the topics covered
if you so desire.
Important concepts are illustrated with practical examples, including a case
study that will go from idea to deployed model by the end of the book. Most
examples will be accompanied by illustrations, and many will contain code. All
of the code used in this book can be found in the book’s companion GitHub
repository.
Because this book focuses on describing the process of ML, each chapter builds
upon concepts defined in earlier ones. For this reason, I recommend reading it in
order so that you can understand how each successive step fits into the entire
process. If you are looking to explore a subset of the process of ML, you might
be better served with a more specialized book. If that is the case, I’ve shared a
few recommendations.

Additional Resources
         If you’d like to know ML well enough to write your own algorithms
         from scratch, I recommend Data Science from Scratch, by Joel Grus. If
         the theory of deep learning is what you are after, the textbook Deep
         Learning (MIT Press), by Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron
         Courville, is a comprehensive resource.
         If you are wondering how to train models efficiently and accurately on
         specific datasets, Kaggle and fast.ai are great places to look.
         If you’d like to learn how to build scalable applications that need to
         process a lot of data, I recommend looking at Designing Data-Intensive
         Applications (O’Reilly), by Martin Kleppmann.

If you have coding experience and some basic ML knowledge and want to build
ML–driven products, this book will guide you through the entire process from
product idea to shipped prototype. If you already work as a data scientist or ML
engineer, this book will add new techniques to your ML development tool. If you
do not know how to code but collaborate with data scientists, this book can help
you understand the process of ML, as long as you are willing to skip some of the
in-depth code examples.
Let’s start by diving deeper into the meaning of practical ML.


Practical ML
For the purpose of this introduction, think of ML as the process of leveraging
patterns in data to automatically tune algorithms. This is a general definition, so
you will not be surprised to hear that many applications, tools, and services are
starting to integrate ML at the core of the way they function.
Some of these tasks are user-facing, such as search engines, recommendations on
social platforms, translation services, or systems that automatically detect
familiar faces in photographs, follow instructions from voice commands, or
attempt to provide useful suggestions to finish a sentence in an email.
Some work in less visible ways, silently filtering spam emails and fraudulent
accounts, serving ads, predicting future usage patterns to efficiently allocate
resources, or experimenting with personalizing website experiences for each
user.
Many products currently leverage ML, and even more could do so. Practical ML
refers to the task of identifying practical problems that could benefit from ML
and delivering a successful solution to these problems. Going from a high-level
product goal to ML–powered results is a challenging task that this book tries to
help you to accomplish.
Some ML courses will teach students about ML methods by providing a dataset
and having them train a model on them, but training an algorithm on a dataset is
a small part of the ML process. Compelling ML–powered products rely on more
than an aggregate accuracy score and are the results of a long process. This book
will start from ideation and continue all the way through to production,
illustrating every step on an example application. We will share tools, best
practices, and common pitfalls learned from working with applied teams that are
deploying these kinds of systems every day.
What This Book Covers
To cover the topic of building applications powered by ML, the focus of this
book is concrete and practical. In particular, this book aims to illustrate the
whole process of building ML–powered applications.
To do so, I will first describe methods to tackle each step in the process. Then, I
will illustrate these methods using an example project as a case study. The book
also contains many practical examples of ML in industry and features interviews
with professionals who have built and maintained production ML models.

The entire process of ML
To successfully serve an ML product to users, you need to do more than simply
train a model. You need to thoughtfully translate your product need to an ML
problem, gather adequate data, efficiently iterate in between models, validate
your results, and deploy them in a robust manner.
Building a model often represents only a tenth of the total workload of an ML
project. Mastering the entire ML pipeline is crucial to successfully build
projects, succeed at ML interviews, and be a top contributor on ML teams.

A technical, practical case study
While we won’t be re-implementing algorithms from scratch in C, we will stay
practical and technical by using libraries and tools providing higher-level
abstractions. We will go through this book building an example ML application
together, from the initial idea to the deployed product.
I will illustrate key concepts with code snippets when applicable, as well as
figures describing our application. The best way to learn ML is by practicing it,
so I encourage you to go through the book reproducing the examples and
adapting them to build your own ML–powered application.

Real business applications
Throughout this book, I will include conversations and advice from ML leaders
who have worked on data teams at tech companies such as StitchFix, Jawbone,
and FigureEight. These discussions will cover practical advice garnered after
building ML applications with millions of users and will correct some popular
misconceptions about what makes data scientists and data science teams
successful.

Prerequisites
This book assumes some familiarity with programming. I will mainly be using
Python for technical examples and assume that the reader is familiar with the
syntax. If you’d like to refresh your Python knowledge, I recommend The
Hitchhiker’s Guide to Python (O’Reilly), by Kenneth Reitz and Tanya Schlusser.
In addition, while I will define most ML concepts referred to in the book, I will
not cover the inner workings of all ML algorithms used. Most of these
algorithms are standard ML methods that are covered in introductory-level ML
resources, such as the ones mentioned in “Additional Resources”.

Our Case Study: ML–Assisted Writing
To concretely illustrate this idea, we will build an ML application together as we
go through this book.
As a case study, I chose an application that can accurately illustrate the
complexity of iterating and deploying ML models. I also wanted to cover a
product that could produce value. This is why we will be implementing a
machine learning–powered writing assistant.
Our goal is to build a system that will help users write better. In particular, we
will aim to help people write better questions. This may seem like a very vague
objective, and I will define it more clearly as we scope out the project, but it is a
good example for a few key reasons.
Text data is everywhere
   Text data is abundantly available for most use cases you can think of and is
   core to many practical ML applications. Whether we are trying to better
   understand the reviews of our product, accurately categorize incoming
   support requests, or tailor our promotional messages to potential audiences,
   we will consume and produce text data.
Writing assistants are useful
   From Gmail’s text prediction feature to Grammarly’s smart spellchecker,
   ML–powered editors have proven that they can deliver value to users in a
   variety of ways. This makes it particularly interesting for us to explore how
   to build them from scratch.

ML–assisted writing is self-standing
   Many ML applications can function only when tightly integrated into a
   broader ecosystem, such as ETA prediction for ride-hailing companies,
   search and recommendation systems for online retailers, and ad bidding
   models. A text editor, however, even though it could benefit from being
   integrated into a document editing ecosystem, can prove valuable on its own
   and be exposed through a simple website.
Throughout the book, this project will allow us to highlight the challenges and
associated solutions we suggest to build ML–powered applications.

The ML Process
The road from an idea to a deployed ML application is long and winding. After
seeing many companies and individuals build such projects, I’ve identified four
key successive stages, which will each be covered in a section of this book.

     1. Identifying the right ML approach: The field of ML is broad and often
        proposes a multitude of ways to tackle a given product goal. The best
        approach for a given problem will depend on many factors such as
        success criteria, data availability, and task complexity. The goals of this
        stage are to set the right success criteria and to identify an adequate
        initial dataset and model choice.
     2. Building an initial prototype: Start by building an end-to-end prototype
        before working on a model. This prototype should aim to tackle the
        product goal with no ML involved and will allow you to determine how
        to best apply ML. Once a prototype is built, you should have an idea of
        whether you need ML, and you should be able to start gathering a
        dataset to train a model.
     3. Iterating on models: Now that you have a dataset, you can train a model
        and evaluate its shortcomings. The goal of this stage is to repeatedly
            alternate between error analysis and implementation. Increasing the
            speed at which this iteration loop happens is the best way to increase
            ML development speed.
         4. Deployment and monitoring: Once a model shows good performance,
            you should pick an adequate deployment option. Once deployed,
            models often fail in unexpected ways. The last two chapters of this book
            will cover methods to mitigate and monitor model errors.

There is a lot of ground to cover, so let’s dive right in and start with Chapter 1!


Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Italic
    Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file extensions.

Constant width
    Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to program
    elements such as variable or function names, databases, data types,
    environment variables, statements, and keywords.

Constant width bold
    Shows commands or other text that should be typed literally by the user.

Constant width italic
    Shows text that should be replaced with user-supplied values or by values
    determined by context.


                                                   TIP
     This element signifies a tip or suggestion.




                                                   NOTE
    This element signifies a general note.




                                             WARNING
    This element indicates a warning or caution.




Using Code Examples
Supplemental code examples for this book are available for download at
https://oreil.ly/ml-powered-applications.
If you have a technical question or a problem using the code examples, please
send email to bookquestions@oreilly.com.
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, if example code is
offered with this book, you may use it in your programs and documentation. You
do not need to contact us for permission unless you’re reproducing a significant
portion of the code. For example, writing a program that uses several chunks of
code from this book does not require permission. Selling or distributing
examples from O’Reilly books does require permission. Answering a question
by citing this book and quoting example code does not require permission.
Incorporating a significant amount of example code from this book into your
product’s documentation does require permission.
We appreciate, but generally do not require, attribution. An attribution usually
includes the title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: Building Machine
Learning Powered Applications by Emmanuel Ameisen (O’Reilly). Copyright
2020 Emmanuel Ameisen, 978-1-492-04511-3.”
If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the permission
given here, feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com.


O’Reilly Online Learning

                                              NOTE
    For more than 40 years, O’Reilly Media has provided technology and business training,
    knowledge, and insight to help companies succeed.



Our unique network of experts and innovators share their knowledge and
expertise through books, articles, conferences, and our online learning platform.
O’Reilly’s online learning platform gives you on-demand access to live training
courses, in-depth learning paths, interactive coding environments, and a vast
collection of text and video from O’Reilly and 200+ other publishers. For more
information, please visit http://oreilly.com.


How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:

        O’Reilly Media, Inc.

        1005 Gravenstein Highway North

        Sebastopol, CA 95472

        800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)

        707-829-0515 (international or local)

        707-829-0104 (fax)

You can access the web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and
any additional information, at
https://oreil.ly/Building_ML_Powered_Applications.
Email bookquestions@oreilly.com to comment or ask technical questions about
this book.
For more information about our books, courses, conferences, and news, see our
website at http://www.oreilly.com.
Find us on Facebook: http://facebook.com/oreilly
Follow us on Twitter: http://twitter.com/oreillymedia
Watch us on YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia


Acknowledgments
The project of writing this book started as a consequence of my work mentoring
Fellows and overseeing ML projects at Insight Data Science. For giving me the
opportunity to lead this program and for encouraging me to write about the
lessons learned doing so, I’d like to thank Jake Klamka and Jeremy Karnowski,
respectively. I’d also like to thank the hundreds of Fellows I’ve worked with at
Insight for allowing me to help them push the limits of what an ML project can
look like.
Writing a book is a daunting task, and the O’Reilly staff helped make it more
manageable every step of the way. In particular, I would like to thank my editor,
Melissa Potter, who tirelessly provided guidance, suggestions, and moral support
throughout the journey that is writing a book. Thank you to Mike Loukides for
somehow convincing me that writing a book was a reasonable endeavor.
Thank you to the tech reviewers who combed through early drafts of this book,
pointing out errors and offering suggestions for improvement. Thank you Alex
Gude, Jon Krohn, Kristen McIntyre, and Douwe Osinga for taking the time out
of your busy schedules to help make this book the best version of itself that it
could be. To data practitioners whom I asked about the challenges of practical
ML they felt needed the most attention, thank you for your time and insights,
and I hope you’ll find that this book covers them adequately.
Finally, for their unwavering support during the series of busy weekends and late
nights that came with writing this book, I’d like to thank my unwavering partner
Mari, my sarcastic sidekick Eliott, my wise and patient family, and my friends
who refrained from reporting me as missing. You made this book a reality.
         Part I. Find the Correct ML
                   Approach

Most individuals or companies have a good grasp of which problems they are
interested in solving—for example, predicting which customers will leave an
online platform or building a drone that will follow a user as they ski down a
mountain. Similarly, most people can quickly learn how to train a model to
classify customers or detect objects to reasonable accuracy given a dataset.
What is much rarer, however, is the ability to take a problem, estimate how best
to solve it, build a plan to tackle it with ML, and confidently execute on said
plan. This is often a skill that has to be learned through experience, after multiple
overly ambitious projects and missed deadlines.
For a given product, there are many potential ML solutions. In Figure I-1, you
can see a mock-up of a potential writing assistant tool on the left, which includes
a suggestion and an opportunity for the user to provide feedback. On the right of
the image is a diagram of a potential ML approach to provide such
recommendations.




                              Figure I-1. From product to ML
This section starts by covering these different potential approaches, as well as
methods to choose one over the others. It then dives into methods to reconcile a
model’s performance metrics with product requirements.
To do this, we will tackle two successive topics:
Chapter 1
   By the end of this chapter, you will be able to take an idea for an application,
   estimate whether it is possible to solve, determine whether you would need
   ML to do so, and figure out which kind of model would make the most sense
   to start with.

Chapter 2
   In this chapter, we will cover how to accurately evaluate your model’s
   performance within the context of your application’s goals and how to use
   this measure to make regular progress.
Chapter 1. From Product Goal to
ML Framing

ML allows machines to learn from data and behave in a probabilistic way to
solve problems by optimizing for a given objective. This stands in opposition to
traditional programming, in which a programmer writes step-by-step instructions
describing how to solve a problem. This makes ML particularly useful to build
systems for which we are unable to define a heuristic solution.
Figure 1-1 describes two ways to write a system to detect cats. On the left, a
program consists of a procedure that has been manually written out. On the right,
an ML approach leverages a dataset of photos of cats and dogs labeled with the
corresponding animal to allow a model to learn the mapping from image to
category. In the ML approach, there is no specification of how the result should
be achieved, only a set of example inputs and outputs.




                   Figure 1-1. From defining procedures to showing examples

ML is powerful and can unlock entirely new products, but since it is based on
pattern recognition, it introduces a level of uncertainty. It is important to identify
which parts of a product would benefit from ML and how to frame a learning
goal in a way that minimizes the risks of users having a poor experience.
For example, it is close to impossible (and extremely time-consuming to
attempt) for humans to write step-by-step instructions to automatically detect
which animal is in an image based on pixel values. By feeding thousands of
images of different animals to a convolutional neural network (CNN), however,
we can build a model that performs this classification more accurately than a
human. This makes it an attractive task to tackle with ML.
On the other side, an application that calculates your taxes automatically should
rely on guidelines provided by the government. As you may have heard, having
errors on your tax return is generally frowned upon. This makes the use of ML
for automatically generating tax returns a dubious proposition.
You never want to use ML when you can solve your problem with a manageable
set of deterministic rules. By manageable, I mean a set of rules that you could
confidently write and that would not be too complex to maintain.
So while ML opens up a world of different applications, it is important to think
about which tasks can and should be solved by ML. When building products,
you should start from a concrete business problem, determine whether it requires
ML, and then work on finding the ML approach that will allow you to iterate as
rapidly as possible.
We will cover this process in this chapter, starting with methods to estimate what
tasks are able to be solved by ML, which ML approaches are appropriate for
which product goals, and how to approach data requirements. I will illustrate
these methods with the ML Editor case study that we mentioned in “Our Case
Study: ML–Assisted Writing”, and an interview with Monica Rogati.


Estimate What Is Possible
Since ML models can tackle tasks without humans needing to give them step-by-
step instructions, that means they are able to perform some tasks better than
human experts (such as detecting tumors from radiology images or playing Go)
and some that are entirely inaccessible to humans (such as recommending
articles out of a pool of millions or changing the voice of a speaker to sound like
someone else).
The ability of ML to learn directly from data makes it useful in a broad range of
applications but makes it harder for humans to accurately distinguish which
problems are solvable by ML. For each successful result published in a research
paper or a corporate blog, there are hundreds of reasonable-sounding ideas that
have entirely failed.
While there is currently no surefire way to predict ML success, there are
guidelines that can help you reduce the risk associated with tackling an ML
project. Most importantly, you should always start with a product goal to then
decide how best to solve it. At this stage, be open to any approach whether it
requires ML or not. When considering ML approaches, make sure to evaluate
those approaches based on how appropriate they are for the product, not simply
on how interesting the methods are in a vacuum.
The best way to do this is by following two successive steps: (1) framing your
product goal in an ML paradigm, and (2) evaluating the feasibility of that ML
task. Depending on your evaluation, you can readjust your framing until we are
satisfied. Let’s explore what these steps really mean.

     1. Framing a product goal in an ML paradigm: When we build a product,
        we start by thinking of what service we want to deliver to users. As we
        mentioned in the introduction, we’ll illustrate concepts in this book
        using the case study of an editor that helps users write better questions.
        The goal of this product is clear: we want users to receive actionable
        and useful advice on the content they write. ML problems, however, are
        framed in an entirely different way. An ML problem concerns itself with
        learning a function from data. An example is learning to take in a
        sentence in one language and output it in another. For one product goal,
        there are usually many different ML formulations, with varying levels
        of implementation difficulty.
     2. Evaluating ML feasibility: All ML problems are not created equal! As
        our understanding of ML has evolved, problems such as building a
        model to correctly classify photos of cats and dogs have become
        solvable in a matter of hours, while others, such as creating a system
        capable of carrying out a conversation, remain open research problems.
        To efficiently build ML applications, it is important to consider multiple
        potential ML framings and start with the ones we judge as the simplest.
        One of the best ways to evaluate the difficulty of an ML problem is by
        looking at both the kind of data it requires and at the existing models
        that could leverage said data.
To suggest different framings and evaluate their feasibility, we should examine
two core aspects of an ML problem: data and models.
We will start with models.

Models
There are many commonly used models in ML, and we will abstain from giving
an overview of all of them here. Feel free to refer to the books listed in
“Additional Resources” for a more thorough overview. In addition to common
models, many model variations, novel architectures, and optimization strategies
are published on a weekly basis. In May 2019 alone, more than 13,000 papers
were submitted to ArXiv, a popular electronic archive of research where papers
about new models are frequently submitted.
It is useful, however, to share an overview of different categories of models and
how they can be applied to different problems. To this end, I propose here a
simple taxonomy of models based on how they approach a problem. You can use
it as a guide for selecting an approach to tackle a particular ML problem.
Because models and data are closely coupled in ML, you will notice some
overlap between this section and “Data types”.
ML algorithms can be categorized based on whether they require labels. Here, a
label refers to the presence in the data of an ideal output that a model should
produce for a given example. Supervised algorithms leverage datasets that
contain labels for inputs, and they aim to learn a mapping from inputs to labels.
Unsupervised algorithms, on the other hand, do not require labels. Finally,
weakly supervised algorithms leverage labels that aren’t exactly the desired
output but that resemble it in some way.
Many product goals can be tackled by both supervised and unsupervised
algorithms. A fraud detection system can be built by training a model to detect
transactions that differ from the average one, requiring no labels. Such a system
could also be built by manually labeling transactions as fraudulent or legitimate,
and training a model to learn from said labels.
For most applications, supervised approaches are easier to validate since we
have access to labels to assess the quality of a model’s prediction. This also
makes it easier to train models since we have access to desired outputs. While
creating a labeled dataset can sometimes be time-consuming initially, it makes it
much easier to build and validate models. For this reason, this book will mostly
cover supervised approaches.
With that being said, determining which kind of inputs your model will take in
and which outputs it will produce will help you narrow down potential
approaches significantly. Based on these types, any of the following categories
of ML approaches could be a good fit:

         Classification and regression
         Knowledge extraction
         Catalog organization
         Generative models

I’ll expand on these further in the following section. As we explore these
different modeling approaches, I recommend thinking about which kind of data
you have available to you or could gather. Oftentimes, data availability ends up
being the limiting factor in model selection.

Classification and regression
Some projects are focused on effectively classifying data points between two or
more categories or attributing them a value on a continuous scale (referred to as
regression instead of classification). Regression and classification are technically
different, but oftentimes methods to tackle them have significant overlap, so we
lump them together here.
One of the reasons classification and regression are similar is because most
classification models output a probability score for a model to belong to a
category. The classification aspect then boils down to deciding how to attribute
an object to a category based on said scores. At a high level, a classification
model can thus be seen as a regression on probability values.
Commonly, we classify or score individual examples, such as spam filters that
classify each email as valid or junk, fraud detection systems that classify users as
fraudulent or legitimate, or computer vision radiology models that classify bones
as fractured or healthy.
In Figure 1-2, you can see an example of classifying a sentence according to its
sentiment, and the topic it covers.




                    Figure 1-2. Classifying a sentence in multiple categories

In regression projects, instead of attributing a class to each example, we give
them a value. Predicting the sale price of a home based on attributes such as how
many rooms it has and where it is located is an example of a regression problem.
In some cases, we have access to a series of past data points (instead of one) to
predict an event in the future. This type of data is often called a time series, and
making predictions from a series of data points is referred to as forecasting.
Time-series data could represent a patient’s medical history or a series of
attendance measurements from national parks. These projects often benefit from
models and features that can leverage this added temporal dimension.
In other cases, we attempt to detect unusual events from a dataset. This is called
anomaly detection. When a classification problem is trying to detect events that
represent a small minority of the data and thus are hard to detect accurately, a
different set of methods is often required. Picking a needle out of a haystack is a
good analogy here.
Good classification and regression work most often requires significant feature
selection and feature engineering work. Feature selection consists of identifying
a subset of features that have the most predictive value. Feature generation is the
task of identifying and generating good predictors of a target by modifying and
combining existing features of a dataset. We will cover both of these topics in
more depth in Part III.
Recently, deep learning has shown a promising ability to automatically generate
useful features from images, text, and audio. In the future, it may play a larger
part in simplifying feature generation and selection, but for now, they remain
integral parts of the ML workflow.
Finally, we can often build on top of the classification or score described earlier
to provide useful advice. This requires building an interpretable classification
model and using its feature to generate actionable advice. More on this later!
Not all problems aim to attribute a set of categories or values to an example. In
some cases, we’d like to operate at a more granular level and extract information
from parts of an input, such as knowing where an object is in a picture, for
example.

Knowledge extraction from unstructured data
Structured data is data that is stored in a tabular format. Database tables and
Excel sheets are good examples of structured data. Unstructured data refers to
datasets that are not in a tabular format. This includes text (from articles,
reviews, Wikipedia, and so on), music, videos, and songs.
In Figure 1-3, you can see an example of structured data on the left and
unstructured data on the right. Knowledge extraction models focus on taking a
source of unstructured data and extracting structure out of it using ML.
In the case of text, knowledge extraction can be used to add structure to reviews,
for example. A model can be trained to extract aspects such as cleanliness,
service quality, and price from reviews. Users could then easily access reviews
that mention topics they are interested in.




                 Figure 1-3. Example types of structured and unstructured data
In the medical domain, a knowledge extraction model could be built to take raw
text from medical papers as input, and extract information such as the disease
that is discussed in the paper, as well as the associated diagnosis and its
performance. In Figure 1-4, a model takes a sentence as an input and extracts
which words refer to a type of media and which words refer to the title of a
media. Using such a model on comments in a fan forum, for example, would
allow us to generate summaries of which movies frequently get discussed.




                  Figure 1-4. Extracting media type and title from a sentence

For images, knowledge extraction tasks often consist of finding areas of interest
in an image and categorizing them. Two common approaches are depicted in
Figure 1-5: object detection is a coarser approach that consists of drawing
rectangles (referred to as bounding boxes) around areas of interest, while
segmentation precisely attributes each pixel of an image to a given category.
                     Figure 1-5. Bounding boxes and segmentation masks

Sometimes, this extracted information can be used as an input to another model.
An example is using a pose detection model to extract key points from a video of
a yogi, and feeding those key points to a second model that classifies the pose as
correct or not based on labeled data. Figure 1-6 shows an example of a series of
two models that could do just this. The first model extracts structured
information (the coordinates of joints) from unstructured data (a photo), and the
second one takes these coordinates and classifies them as a yoga pose.




                              Figure 1-6. Yoga pose detection

The models we’ve seen so far focus on generating outputs conditioned on a
given input. In some cases such as search engines or recommendation systems,
the product goal is about surfacing relevant items. This is what we will cover in
the following category.

Catalog organization
Catalog organization models most often produce a set of results to present to
users. These results can be conditioned on an input string typed into a search bar,
an uploaded image, or a phrase spoken to a home assistant. In many cases such
as streaming services, this set of results can also be proactively presented to the
user as content they may like without them making a request at all.
Figure 1-7 shows an example of such a system that volunteers potential
candidate movies to watch based on a movie the user just viewed, but without
having the user perform any form of search.




                          Figure 1-7. Movie recommendations

These models thus either recommend items that are related to an item the user
already expressed interest in (similar Medium articles or Amazon products) or
provide a useful way to search through a catalog (allowing users to search for
items by typing text or submitting their own photos).
These recommendations are most often based on learning from previous user
patterns, in which case they are called collaborative recommendation systems.
Sometimes, they are based on particular attributes of items, in which case they
are called content-based recommendation systems. Some systems leverage both
collaborative and content-based approaches.
Finally, ML can also be used for creative purposes. Models can learn to generate
aesthetically pleasing images, audio, and even amusing text. Such models are
referred to as generative models.

Generative models
Generative models focus on generating data, potentially dependent on user input.
Because these models focus on generating data rather than classifying it in
categories, scoring it, extracting information from it, or organizing it, they
usually have a wide range of outputs. This means that generative models are
uniquely fit for tasks such as translation, where outputs are immensely varied.
On the other side, generative models are often used to train and have outputs that
are less constrained, making them a riskier choice for production. For that
reason, unless they are necessary to attain your goal, I recommend starting with
other models first. For readers who would like to dive deeper into generative
models, however, I recommend the book Generative Deep Learning, by David
Foster.
Practical examples include translation, which maps sentences in one language to
another; summarization; subtitle generation, which maps videos and audio tracks
to transcripts; and neural style transfer (see Gatys et al., “A Neural Algorithm of
Artistic Style”), which maps images to stylized renditions.
Figure 1-8 shows an example of a generative model transforming a photograph
on the left by giving it a style similar to a painting shown in the vignette on the
right side.




      Figure 1-8. Style transfer example from Gatys et al., “A Neural Algorithm of Artistic Style”

As you can tell by now, each type of model requires a different type of data to be
trained on. Commonly, a choice of a model will strongly depend on the data you
are able to obtain—data availability often drives model selection.
Let’s cover a few common data scenarios and associated models.
Data
Supervised ML models leverage patterns in data to learn useful mappings
between inputs and outputs. If a dataset contains features that are predictive of
the target output, it should be possible for an appropriate model to learn from it.
Most often, however, we do not initially have the right data to train a model to
solve a product use case from end-to-end.
For example, say we are training a speech recognition system that will listen for
requests from customers, understand their intent, and perform actions depending
on said intent. When we start working on this project, we may define a set of
intents we would want to understand, such as “playing a movie on the
television.”
To train an ML model to accomplish this task, we would need to have a dataset
containing audio clips of users of diverse backgrounds asking in their own terms
for the system to play a movie. Having a representative set of inputs is crucial, as
any model will only be able to learn from the data that we present to it. If a
dataset contains examples from only a subset of the population, a product will be
useful to only that subset. With that in mind, because of the specialized domain
we have selected, it is extremely unlikely that a dataset of such examples already
exists.
For most applications we would want to tackle, we will need to search for,
curate, and collect additional data. The data acquisition process can vary widely
in scope and complexity depending on the specifics of a project, and estimating
the challenge ahead of time is crucial in order to succeed.
To start, let’s define a few different situations you can find yourself in when
searching for a dataset. This initial situation should be a key factor in deciding
how to proceed.

Data types
Once we’ve defined a problem as mapping inputs to outputs, we can search for
data sources that follow this mapping.
For fraud detection, these could be examples of fraudulent and innocent users,
along with features of their account that we could use to predict their behavior.
For translation, this would be a corpus of sentence pairs in the source and target
domains. For content organization and search, this could be a history of past
searches and clicks.
We will rarely be able to find the exact mapping we are looking for. For this
reason, it is useful to consider a few different cases. Think of this as a hierarchy
of needs for data.

Data availability
There are roughly three levels of data availability, from best-case scenario to
most challenging. Unfortunately, as with most other tasks, you can generally
assume that the most useful type of data will be the hardest to find. Let’s go
through them.
Labeled data exists
   This is the leftmost category in Figure 1-9. When working on a supervised
   model, finding a labeled dataset is every practitioner’s dream. Labeled here
   means that many data points contain the target value that the model is trying
   to predict. This makes training and judging model quality much easier, as
   labels provide ground truth answers. Finding a labeled dataset that fits your
   needs and is freely available on the web is rare in practice. It is common,
   however, to mistake the dataset that you find for the dataset that you need.

Weakly labeled data exists
   This is the middle category in Figure 1-9. Some datasets contain labels that
   are not exactly a modeling target, but somewhat correlated with it. Playback
   and skip history for a music streaming service are examples of a weakly
   labeled dataset for predicting whether a user dislikes a song. While a listener
   may have not marked a song as disliked, if they skipped it as it was playing,
   it is an indication that they may have not been fond of it. Weak labels are less
   precise by definition but often easier to find than perfect labels.
Unlabeled data exists
   This category is on the right side of Figure 1-9. In some cases, while we do
   not have a labeled dataset mapping desired inputs to outputs, we at least have
   access to a dataset containing relevant examples. For the text translation
   example, we might have access to large collections of text in both languages,
   but with no direct mapping between them. This means we need to label the
   dataset, find a model that can learn from unlabeled data, or do a little bit of
   both.
We need to acquire data
   In some cases, we are one step away from unlabeled data, as we need to first
   acquire it. In many cases, we do not have a dataset for what we need and thus
   will need to find a way to acquire such data. This is often seen as an
   insurmountable task, but many methods now exist to rapidly gather and label
   data. This will be the focus of Chapter 4.
For our case study, an ideal dataset would be a set of user-typed questions, along
with a set of better worded questions. A weakly labeled dataset would be a
dataset of many questions with some weak labels indicative of their quality such
as “likes” or “upvotes.” This would help a model learn what makes for good and
bad questions but would not provide side-by-side examples for the same
question. You can see both of these examples in Figure 1-9.




                      Figure 1-9. Data availability versus data usefulness

In general in ML, a weakly labeled dataset refers to a dataset that contains
information that will help a model learn, but not the exact ground truth. In
practice, most datasets that we can gather are weakly labeled.
Having an imperfect dataset is entirely fine and shouldn’t stop you. The ML
process is iterative in nature, so starting with a dataset and getting some initial
results is the best way forward, regardless of the data quality.
Datasets are iterative
In many cases, since you will not be able to immediately find a dataset
containing a direct mapping from inputs to your desired output, I suggest
progressively iterating on the way you formulate the problem, making it easier to
find an adequate dataset to start with. Each dataset you explore and use will
provide you with valuable information that you can use to curate the next
version of your dataset and generate useful features for your models.
Let’s now dive into the case study and see how we can use what we’ve learned
to identify different models and datasets we could use, and choose the most
appropriate.


Framing the ML Editor
Let’s see how we could iterate through a product use case to find the right ML
framing. We’ll get through this process by outlining a method to progress from a
product goal (helping users write better questions) to an ML paradigm.
We would like to build an editor that accepts questions by users and improves
them to be better written, but what does “better” mean in this case? Let’s start by
defining the writing assistant’s product goal a little more clearly.
Many people use forums, social networks, and websites such as Stack Overflow
to find answers to their questions. However, the way that people ask questions
has a dramatic impact on whether they receive a useful answer. This is
unfortunate both for the user looking to get their question answered and for
future users that may have the same problem and could have found an existing
answer useful. To that end, our goal will be to build an assistant that can help
users write better questions.
We have a product goal and now need to decide which modeling approach to
use. To make this decision, we will go through the iteration loop of model
selection and data validation mentioned earlier.

Trying to Do It All with ML: An End-to-End Framework
In this context, end-to-end means using a single model to go from input to output
with no intermediary steps. Since most product goals are very specific,
attempting to solve an entire use case by learning it from end-to-end often
requires custom-built cutting-edge ML models. This may be the right solution
for teams that have the resources to develop and maintain such models, but it is
often worth it to start with more well-understood models first.
In our case, we could attempt to gather a dataset of poorly formulated questions,
as well as their professionally edited versions. We could then use a generative
model to go straight from one text to the other.
Figure 1-10 depicts what this would look like in practice. It shows a simple
diagram with user input on the left, the desired output on the right, and a model
in between.




                            Figure 1-10. End-to-end approach

As you’ll see, this approach comes with significant challenges:
Data
   To acquire such a dataset, we would need to find pairs of questions with the
   same intent but of different wording quality. This is quite a rare dataset to
   find as is. Building it ourselves would be costly as well, as we would need to
   be assisted by professional editors to generate this data.

Model
   Models going from one sequence of text to another, seen in the generative
   models category discussed earlier, have progressed tremendously in recent
   years. Sequence-to-sequence models (as described in the paper by I.
   Sutskever et al., “Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural Networks”)
   were originally proposed in 2014 for translation tasks and are closing the gap
   between machine and human translation. The success of these models,
   however, has mostly been on sentence-level tasks, and they have not been
   frequently used to process text longer than a paragraph. This is because so
   far, they have not been able to capture long-term context from one paragraph
   to another. Additionally, because they usually have a large number of
   parameters, they are some of the slowest models to train. If a model is
    trained only once, this is not necessarily an issue. If it needs to be retrained
    hourly or daily, training time can become an important factor.

Latency
    Sequence-to-sequence models are often autoregressive models, meaning they
    require the model’s output of the previous word to start working on the next.
    This allows them to leverage information from neighboring words but causes
    them to be slower to train and slower to run inference on than the simpler
    models. Such models can take a few seconds to produce an answer at
    inference time, as opposed to subsecond latency for simpler models. While it
    is possible to optimize such a model to run quickly enough, it will require
    additional engineering work.

Ease of implementation
    Training complex end-to-end models is a very delicate and error-prone
    process, as they have many moving parts. This means that we need to
    consider the tradeoff between a model’s potential performance and the
    complexity it adds to a pipeline. This complexity will slow us down when
    building a pipeline, but it also introduces a maintenance burden. If we
    anticipate that other teammates may need to iterate on and improve on your
    model, it may be worthwhile to choose a set of simpler, more well-
    understood models.
This end-to-end approach could work, but it will require a lot of upfront data
gathering and engineering effort, with no success guarantee, so it would be
worthwhile to explore other alternatives, as we will cover next.

The Simplest Approach: Being the Algorithm
As you’ll see in the interview at the end of this section, it is often a great idea for
data scientists to be the algorithm before they implement it. In other words, to
understand how to best automate a problem, start by attempting to solve it
manually. So, if we were editing questions ourselves to improve readability and
the odds of getting an answer, how would we go about it?
A first approach would be to not use data at all but leverage prior art to define
what makes a question or a body of text well written. For general writing tips,
we could reach out to a professional editor or research newspapers’ style guides
to learn more.
In addition, we should dive into a dataset to look at individual examples and
trends and let those inform our modeling strategy. We will skip this for now as
we will cover how to do this in more depth in Chapter 4.
To start, we could look at existing research to identify a few attributes we might
use to help people write more clearly. These features could include factors such
as:
Prose simplicity
   We often give new writers the advice to use simpler words and sentence
   structures. We could thus establish a set of criteria on the appropriate
   sentence and word length, and recommend changes as needed.

Tone
   We could measure the use of adverbs, superlatives, and punctuation to
   measure the polarity of the text. Depending on the context, more opinionated
   questions may receive fewer answers.
Structural features
   Finally, we could try to extract the presence of important structural attributes
   such as the use of greetings or question marks.
Once we have identified and generated useful features, we can build a simple
solution that uses them to provide recommendations. There is no ML involved
here, but this phase is crucial for two reasons: it provides a baseline that is very
quick to implement and will serve as a yardstick to measure models against.
To validate our intuition about how to detect good writing, we can gather a
dataset of “good” and “bad” text and see if we can tell the good from the bad
using these features.

Middle Ground: Learning from Our Experience
Now that we have a baseline set of features, we can attempt to use them to learn
a model of style from a body of data. To do this we can gather a dataset, extract
the features we described earlier from it, and train a classifier on it to separate
good and bad examples.
Once we have a model that can classify written text, we can inspect it to identify
which features are highly predictive and use those as recommendations. We will
see how to do this in practice in Chapter 7.
Figure 1-11 describes this approach. On the left side, a model is trained to
classify a question as good or bad. On the right side, the trained model is given a
question and scores candidate reformulations of this question that will lead to it
receiving a better score. The reformulation with the highest score is
recommended to the user.




                  Figure 1-11. A middle ground between manual and end-to-end

Let’s examine the challenges we outlined in “Trying to Do It All with ML: An
End-to-End Framework” and see whether the classifier approach makes them
any easier:
Dataset
    We could obtain a dataset of good and bad examples by gathering questions
    from an online forum along with some measure of their quality, such as the
    number of views or upvotes. As opposed to the end-to-end approach, this
    does not require us to have access to revisions of the same questions. We
    simply need a set of good and bad examples we can hope to learn aggregate
    features from, which is an easier dataset to find.
Model
   We need to consider two things here: how predictive a model is (can it
   efficiently separate good and bad articles?) and how easily features can be
   extracted from it (can we see which attributes were used to classify an
   example?). There are many potential models that we could use here, along
   with different features we could extract from text to make it more
   explainable.

Latency
   Most text classifiers are quite quick. We could start with a simple model such
   as a random forest, which can return results in less than a tenth of a second
   on regular hardware, and move on to more complex architectures if needed.

Ease of implementation
   Compared to text generation, text classification is relatively well understood,
   meaning building such a model should be relatively quick. Many examples
   of working text classification pipelines exist online, and many such models
   have already been deployed to production.
If we start with a human heuristic and then build this simple model, we will
quickly be able to have an initial baseline, and the first step toward a solution.
Moreover, the initial model will be a great way to inform what to build next
(more on this in Part III).
For more on the importance of starting with simple baselines, I sat down with
Monica Rogati, who shares some of the lessons she has learned helping data
teams deliver products.


Monica Rogati: How to Choose and Prioritize ML
Projects
After getting her Ph.D. in computer science, Monica Rogati started her career at
LinkedIn where she worked on core products such as integrating ML into the
People You May Know algorithm and built the first version of job-to-candidate
matching. She then became VP of data at Jawbone where she built and led the
entire data team. Monica is now an adviser to dozens of companies whose
number of employees ranges from 5 to 8,000. She has kindly agreed to share
some of the advice she often gives to teams when it comes to designing and
executing on ML products.
Q: How do you scope out an ML product?
A: You have to remember that you are trying to use the best tools to solve a
problem, and only use ML if it makes sense.
Let’s say you wanted to predict what a user of an application will do and show it
to them as a suggestion. You should start by combining discussions on modeling
and product. Among other things, this includes designing the product around
handling ML failures gracefully.
You could start by taking into account the confidence our model has in its
prediction. We could then formulate our suggestions differently based on the
confidence score. If the confidence is above 90%, we present the suggestion
prominently; if it is over 50%, we still display it but with less emphasis, and we
do not display anything if the confidence is below this score.
Q: How do you decide what to focus on in an ML project?
A: You have to find the impact bottleneck, meaning the piece of your pipeline
that could provide the most value if you improve on it. When working with
companies, I often find that they may not be working on the right problem or not
be at the right growth stage for this.
There are often problems around the model. The best way to find this out is to
replace the model with something simple and debug the whole pipeline.
Frequently, the issues will not be with the accuracy of your model. Frequently,
your product is dead even if your model is successful.
Q: Why do you usually recommend starting with a simple model?
A: The goal of our plan should be to derisk our model somehow. The best way to
do this is to start with a “strawman baseline” to evaluate worst-case
performance. For our earlier example, this could be simply suggesting whichever
action the user previously took.
If we did this, how often would our prediction be correct, and how annoying
would our model be to the user if we were wrong? Assuming that our model was
not much better than this baseline, would our product still be valuable?
This applies well to examples in natural language understanding and generation
such as chatbots, translation, Q&A, and summarization. Oftentimes in
summarization, for example, simply extracting the top keywords and categories
covered by an article is enough to serve most users’ needs.
Q: Once you have your whole pipeline, how do you identify the impact
bottleneck?
A: You should start with imagining that the impact bottleneck is solved, and ask
yourself whether it was worth the effort you estimated it would take. I encourage
data scientists to compose a tweet and companies to write a press release before
they even start on a project. That helps them avoid working on something just
because they thought it was cool and puts the impact of the results into context
based on the effort.
The ideal case is that you can pitch the results regardless of the outcome: if you
do not get the best outcome, is this still impactful? Have you learned something
or validated some assumptions? A way to help with this is to build infrastructure
to help lower the required effort for deployment.
At LinkedIn, we had access to a very useful design element, a little window with
a few rows of text and hyperlinks, that we could customize with our data. This
made it easier to launch experiments for projects such as job recommendations,
as the design was already approved. Because the resource investment was low,
the impact did not have to be as large, which allowed for a faster iteration cycle.
The barrier then becomes about nonengineering concerns, such as ethics,
fairness, and branding.
Q: How do you decide which modeling techniques to use?
A: The first line of defense is looking at the data yourself. Let’s say we want to
build a model to recommend groups to LinkedIn users. A naive way would be to
recommend the most popular group containing their company’s name in the
group title. After looking at a few examples, we found out one of the popular
groups for the company Oracle was “Oracle sucks!” which would be a terrible
group to recommend to Oracle employees.
It is always valuable to spend the manual effort to look at inputs and outputs of
your model. Scroll past a bunch of examples to see if anything looks weird. The
head of my department at IBM had this mantra of doing something manually for
an hour before putting in any work.
Looking at your data helps you think of good heuristics, models, and ways to
reframe the product. If you rank examples in your dataset by frequency, you
might even be able to quickly identify and label 80% of your use cases.
At Jawbone, for example, people entered “phrases” to log the content of their
meals. By the time we labeled the top 100 by hand, we had covered 80% of
phrases and had strong ideas of what the main problems we would have to
handle, such as varieties of text encoding and languages.
The last line of defense is to have a diverse workforce that looks at the results.
This will allow you to catch instances where a model is exhibiting discriminative
behavior, such as tagging your friends as a gorilla, or is insensitive by surfacing
painful past experiences with its smart “this time last year” retrospective.


Conclusion
As we’ve seen, building an ML-powered application starts with judging
feasibility and picking an approach. Most often, picking a supervised approach is
the simplest way to get started. Among those, classification, knowledge
extraction, catalog organization, or generative models are the most common
paradigms in practice.
As you are picking an approach, you should identify how easily you’ll be able to
access strongly or weakly labeled data, or any data at all. You should then
compare potential models and datasets by defining a product goal and choosing
the modeling approach that best allows you to accomplish this goal.
We illustrated these steps for the ML Editor, opting to start with simple heuristics
and a classification-based approach. And finally, we covered how leaders such as
Monica Rogati have been applying these practices to successfully ship ML
models to users.
Now that we have chosen an initial approach, it is time to define success metrics
and create an action plan to make regular progress. This will involve setting
minimal performance requirements, doing a deep dive into available modeling
and data resources, and building a simple prototype.
We will cover all of those in Chapter 2.
Chapter 2. Create a Plan

In the previous chapter, we covered how to estimate if ML is necessary, find
where it could be most appropriately used, and convert a product goal to the
most appropriate ML framing. In this chapter, we will cover the use of metrics to
track ML and product progress and compare different ML implementations.
Then, we will identify methods to build a baseline and plan modeling iterations.
I have had the unfortunate opportunity to see many ML projects be doomed from
the start due to a misalignment between product metrics and model metrics.
More projects fail by producing good models that aren’t helpful for a product
rather than due to modeling difficulties. This is why I wanted to dedicate a
chapter to metrics and planning.
We will cover tips to leverage existing resources and the constraints of your
problem to build an actionable plan, which will dramatically simplify any ML
project.
Let’s start with defining performance metrics in more detail.


Measuring Success
When it comes to ML, the first model we build should be the simplest model that
could address a product’s needs, because generating and analyzing results is the
fastest way to make progress in ML. In the previous chapter, we covered three
potential approaches of increasing complexity for the ML Editor. Here they are
as a reminder:
Baseline; designing heuristics based on domain knowledge
   We could start with simply defining rules ourselves, based on prior
   knowledge of what makes for well-written content. We will test these rules
   by seeing if they help differentiate between well-written text and poorly
   written text.
Simple model; classifying text as good or bad, and using the classifier to
generate recommendations
   We could then train a simple model to differentiate between good and bad
   questions. Provided that the model performs well, we can then inspect it to
   see which features it found to be highly predictive of a good question, and
   use those features as recommendations.

Complex model; training an end-to-end model that goes from bad text to good
text
   This is the most complex approach, both in terms of model and data, but if
   we had the resources to gather the training data and build and maintain a
   complex model, we could solve the product requirements directly.
All of these approaches are different and may evolve as we learn more from
prototypes along the way, but when working on ML, you should define a
common set of metrics to compare the success of modeling pipelines.


                                                NOTE
    You Don’t Always Need ML
    You may have noticed that the baseline approach does not rely on ML at all. As we discussed
    in Chapter 1, some features do not require ML. It is important to also realize that even features
    that could benefit from ML can often simply use a heuristic for their first version. Once the
    heuristic is being used, you may even realize that you do not need ML at all.
    Building a heuristic is also often the fastest way to build a feature. Once the feature is built and
    used, you’ll have a clearer view of your user’s needs. This will allow you to evaluate whether
    you need ML, and select a modeling approach.
    In most cases, starting without ML is the fastest way to build an ML product.



To that end, we will cover four categories of performance that have a large
impact on the usefulness of any ML product: business metrics, model metrics,
freshness, and speed. Clearly defining these metrics will allow us to accurately
measure the performance of each iteration.

Business Performance
We’ve talked about the importance of starting with a clear product or feature
goal. Once this goal is clear, a metric should be defined to judge its success. This
metric should be separate from any model metrics and only be a reflection of the
product’s success. Product metrics may be as simple as the number of users a
feature attracts or more nuanced such as the click-through rate (CTR) of the
recommendations we provide.
Product metrics are ultimately the only ones that matter, as they represent the
goals of your product or feature. All other metrics should be used as tools to
improve product metrics. Product metrics, however, do not need to be unique.
While most projects tend to focus on improving one product metric, their impact
is often measured in terms of multiple metrics, including guardrail metrics,
metrics that shouldn’t decline below a given point. For example, an ML project
can aim to increase a given metric such as CTR, while also holding other metrics
steady, such as the average user session length, for example.
For the ML Editor, we will pick a metric that measures the usefulness of a
recommendation. For example, we could use the proportion of times that users
follow suggestions. In order to compute such a metric, the interface of the ML
editor should capture whether a user approves of a suggestion, by overlaying it
above the input and making it clickable, for example.
We’ve seen that each product lends itself to many potential ML approaches. To
measure the effectiveness of an ML approach, you should track model
performance.

Model Performance
For most online products, the ultimate product metric that determines the success
of a model is the proportion of visitors who use the output of a model out of all
the visitors who could benefit from it. In the case of a recommendation system,
for example, performance is often judged by measuring how many people click
on recommended products (see Chapter 8 for potential pitfalls of this approach).
When a product is still being built and not deployed yet, it is not possible to
measure usage metrics. To still measure progress, it is important to define a
separate success metric called an offline metric or a model metric. A good offline
metric should be possible to evaluate without exposing a model to users, and be
as correlated as possible with product metrics and goals.
Different modeling approaches use different model metrics, and changing
approaches can make it much easier to reach a level of modeling performance
that is sufficient to accomplish product goals.
For example, let’s say you are trying to offer helpful suggestions to users as they
type a search query on an online retail website. You’ll measure the success of
this feature by measuring CTR, how often users click on the suggestions you
make.
To generate the suggestions, you could build a model that attempts to guess the
words a user will type and present the predicted completed sentence to them as
they write. You could measure the performance of this model by computing its
word-level accuracy, calculating how often it predicts the correct next set of
words. Such a model would need to reach extremely high accuracy to help
increase the product’s CTR, because a prediction error of one word would be
enough to render a suggestion useless. This approach is sketched out on the left
side of Figure 2-1.
Another approach would be to train a model that classifies user input into
categories in your catalog and suggests the three most likely predicted
categories. You’d measure the performance of your model using accuracy over
all categories rather than accuracy over every English word. Since the number of
categories in a catalog is much smaller than the English vocabulary, this would
be a much easier modeling metric to optimize. In addition, the model only needs
to predict one category correctly to generate a click. It is much easier for this
model to increase the product’s CTR. You can see a mock-up of how this
approach would work in practice on the right side of Figure 2-1.
           Figure 2-1. Slightly altering a product can make modeling tasks much easier

As you can see, small changes to the interaction between the model and product
can make it possible to use a more straightforward modeling approach and
deliver results more reliably. Here are a few other examples of updating an
application to make a modeling task easier:
        Changing an interface so that a model’s results can be omitted if they
        are below a confidence threshold. When building a model to
        autocomplete a sentence typed by the user, for example, the model may
        perform well only on a subset of sentences. We can implement logic to
        only show a suggestion to users if the model’s confidence score exceeds
        90%.
        Presenting a few other predictions or heuristics in addition to a model’s
        top prediction. For example, most websites display more than one
        recommendation suggested by a model. Displaying five candidate items
        instead of just one makes it more likely that suggestions will be useful
        to users, even if the model is the same.
        Communicating to users that a model is still in an experimental phase
        and giving them opportunities to provide feedback. When automatically
        detecting a language that is not in the user’s native tongue and
        translating it for them, websites often add a button for a user to let them
         know whether the translation was accurate and useful.
Even when a modeling approach is appropriate for a problem, it can sometimes
be worthwhile to generate additional model metrics that correlate better with
product performance.
I once worked with a data scientist who built a model to generate HTML from
hand-drawn sketches of simple websites (see his post, “Automated Front-End
Development Using Deep Learning”). The model’s optimization metric
compares each predicted HTML token to the correct one using cross-entropy
loss. The goal of the product, however, is for the generated HTML to produce a
website that looks like the input sketch, regardless of the order of tokens.
Cross-entropy does not account for alignment: if a model generates a correct
HTML sequence except for one extra token at the start, all of the tokens will be
shifted by one compared to the target. Such an output would lead to a very high
loss value, despite producing an almost ideal result. This means that when trying
to evaluate the usefulness of the model, we should look beyond its optimization
metric. In this example, using a BLEU Score provides a better measurement of
the similarity between the generated HTML and the ideal output.
Finally, a product should be designed with reasonable assumptions of model
performance in mind. If a product relies on a model being perfect to be useful, it
is very likely to produce inaccurate or even dangerous results.
For example, if you are building a model that lets you take a picture of a pill and
tells patients its type and dosage, what is the worst accuracy a model could have
and still be useful? If this accuracy requirement is hard to attain with current
methods, could you redesign your product to make sure users are well served by
it and not put at risk by prediction errors it could make?
In our case, the product we want to build will provide writing advice. Most ML
models have certain input they excel at and certain inputs they will struggle with.
From a product standpoint, if we are not able to help—we need to make sure we
are not going to hurt—we would like to limit the amount of time that we output a
result that is worse than the input. How could we express this in model metrics?
Let’s say we build a classification model that attempts to predict whether a
question is good as measured by the number of upvotes it received. The
classifier’s precision would be defined as the proportion of questions that are
truly good out of the ones it predicts as good. Its recall on the other side is the
proportion of questions that it predicts as good out of all the good questions in
the dataset.
If we want to always have advice that is relevant, we would want to prioritize the
model’s precision because when a high-precision model classifies a question as
good (and thus makes a recommendation), there is a high chance that this
question is actually good. High precision means that when we do make a
recommendation, it will tend to be correct. For more about why high-precision
models are more useful for writing recommendations, feel free to refer to “Chris
Harland: Shipping Experiments”.
We measure such metrics by looking through the outputs of a model on a
representative validation set. We will dive into what this means in “Evaluate
Your Model: Look Beyond Accuracy”, but for now, think of a validation set as a
set of data that is held out from training and used to estimate how your model
performs on unseen data.
Initial model performance is important, but so is the ability of a model to stay
useful in the face of changing user behavior. A model trained on a given dataset
will perform well on similar data, but how do we know whether we need to
update a dataset?

Freshness and Distribution Shift
Supervised models draw their predictive power from learning correlations
between input features and prediction targets. This means that most models need
to have been exposed to training data that is similar to a given input to perform
well on it. A model that was trained to predict the age of a user from a photo
using only photos of men will not perform well on photos of women. But even if
a model is trained on an adequate dataset, many problems have a distribution of
data that changes as time goes on. When the distribution of the data shifts, the
model often needs to change as well in order to maintain the same level of
performance.
Let’s imagine that after noticing the impact of rain on traffic in San Francisco,
you built a model to predict traffic conditions based on the amount of rain in the
past week. If you built your model in October using data from the past 3 months,
your model was likely trained on data with daily precipitation lower than an
inch. See Figure 2-2 for an example of how such a distribution might look. As
winter approaches, the average precipitation will become closer to 3 inches,
which is higher than anything the model was exposed to during training, as you
can see in Figure 2-2. If the model isn’t trained on more recent data, it will
struggle to keep performing well.




                            Figure 2-2. Changing distributions

In general, a model can perform well on data it hasn’t seen before as long as it is
similar enough to the data it was exposed to during training.
Not all problems have the same freshness requirements. Translation services for
ancient languages can expect the data they operate to remain relatively constant,
while search engines need to be built with the assumption that they will need to
evolve as fast as users change their search habits.
Depending on your business problem, you should consider how hard it will be to
keep models fresh. How often will you need to retrain models, and how much
will it cost you each time we do so?
For the ML editor, we imagine that the cadence at which the definition of “well-
formulated English prose” changes is relatively low, perhaps in the order of a
year. Freshness requirements would change if we targeted specific domains,
however. For example, the right way to ask a question about mathematics will
change much more slowly than the best phrasing of questions concerning music
trends. Since we estimate that models will need to be retrained every year, we
will require fresh data to train on yearly.
Our baseline and simple model can both learn from unpaired data, which makes
the data gathering process simpler (we’d simply need to find new questions from
the last year). The complex model requires paired data, meaning we will have to
find examples of the same sentences, said in a “good” and “bad” way, every
year. This means satisfying the freshness requirement we’ve defined will be
much harder for a model requiring paired data, since it is more time-consuming
to acquire an updated dataset.
For most applications, popularity can help alleviate data gathering requirements.
If our question phrasing service goes viral, we could add a button for users to
rate the quality of outputs. We could then gather past inputs from users along
with the model’s predictions and associated user ratings and use them as a
training set.
For an application to be popular, however, it should be useful. Oftentimes, this
requires responding to user requests in a timely manner. The speed at which a
model can deliver predictions is thus an important factor to take into account.

Speed
Ideally, a model should deliver a prediction quickly. This allows users to interact
with it more easily and makes it easier to serve a model to many concurrent
users. So how fast does a model need to be? For some use cases, such as
translating a short sentence, users will expect an answer immediately. For others,
such as a medical diagnosis, patients would be happy to wait 24 hours if it meant
that they would get the most accurate results.
In our case, we will consider two potential ways we could deliver suggestions:
through a submission box where the user writes, clicks Submit, and gets a result
or by dynamically updating each time the user enters a new letter. While we may
want to favor the latter because we would be able to make the tool much more
interactive, it would require models to perform much faster.
We could conceivably imagine a user waiting a couple seconds for a result once
they click a submission button, but for a model to run as a user is editing text, it
would need to run significantly under a second. The most powerful models take
longer to process data, so as we iterate through models, we will keep this
requirement in mind. Any model we use should be able to process an example
through its whole pipeline in under two seconds.
Model inference runtimes increase as models get more complex. The difference
is significant even in a domain where each individual data point can be relatively
small data such as NLP (as opposed to tasks on live videos, for example). On the
text data used for the case study in this book, for example, an LSTM is about
three times slower than a random forest (around 22 ms for an LSTM, while the
random forest takes only 7 ms). On an individual datapoint, this difference are
small, but they can quickly add up when needing to run inference on tens of
thousands of examples at a time.
For complex applications where an inference call will be associated with
multiple network calls or database queries, model execution time can become
short compared to the rest of the application logic. In those cases, the speed of
said models becomes less of an issue.
Depending on your problem, there are other categories you could consider, such
as hardware constraints, development time, and maintainability. It is important to
develop an understanding of your needs before choosing a model so that you
make sure to pick said model in an informed way.
Once you identify requirements and associated metrics, it’s time to start making
a plan. This requires estimating the challenges that lie ahead. In the next section,
I’ll cover ways to leverage prior work and explore a dataset to decide what to
build next.


Estimate Scope and Challenges
As we’ve seen, ML performance is often reported in terms of model metrics.
While these metrics are useful, they should be used to improve the product
metrics we defined, which represent the actual task we are trying to solve. As we
iterate on a pipeline, we should keep in mind product metrics and aim to
improve them.
The tools we have covered so far will help us determine whether a project is
worth tackling at all, and measure how well we are currently doing. A logical
next step is to sketch out a plan of attack to estimate the scope and duration of a
project and anticipate potential roadblocks.
In ML, success generally requires understanding the context of the task well,
acquiring a good dataset, and building an appropriate model.
We will cover each of these categories in the following section.

Leverage Domain Expertise
The simplest model we can start with is a heuristic: a good rule of thumb based
on knowledge of the problem and the data. The best way to devise heuristics is
to see what experts are currently doing. Most practical applications are not
entirely novel. How do people currently solve the problem you are trying to
solve?
The second best way to devise heuristics is to look at your data. Based on your
dataset, how would you solve this task if you were doing it manually?
To identify good heuristics, I recommend either learning from experts in the field
or getting familiar with the data. I’ll describe both in a little more detail next.

Learning from experts
For many domains we might want to automate, learning from experts in the
domain can save us dozens of hours of work. If we are attempting to build a
predictive maintenance system for factory equipment, for example, we should
start by reaching out to a factory manager to understand which assumptions we
can reasonably make. This could include understanding how often maintenance
is currently performed, which symptoms usually indicate that a machine will
require maintenance soon, and the legal requirements concerning maintenance.
There are, of course, examples where finding domain experts is likely to be
difficult—such as proprietary data for a novel use case like predicting usage of a
unique website feature. In these cases, however, we can often find professionals
who have had to tackle similar problems and learn from their experiences.
This will allow us to learn about useful features we can leverage, find pitfalls we
should avoid, and most importantly prevent us from reinventing the wheel that
many data scientists get a bad rep for.

Examining the data
As both Monica Rogati in “Monica Rogati: How to Choose and Prioritize ML
Projects” and Robert Munro in “Robert Munro: How Do You Find, Label, and
Leverage Data?” mention, it’s key to look at the data before we start modeling.
Exploratory data analysis (EDA) is the process of visualizing and exploring a
dataset, often to get an intuition to a given business problem. EDA is a crucial
part of building any data product. In addition to EDA, it is crucial to individually
label examples in the way you hope a model would. Doing so helps validate
assumptions and confirms that you chose models that can appropriately leverage
your dataset.
The EDA process will allow you to get an understanding of the trends in your
data, and labeling it yourself will force you to build a set of heuristics to solve
your problem. After having done both previous steps, you should have a clearer
idea of which kind of models will serve you best, as well as any additional data
gathering and labeling strategies we may require.
The next logical step is to see how others have tackled similar modeling
problems.

Stand on the Shoulders of Giants
Have people solved similar problems? If so, the best way to get started is to
understand and reproduce existing results. Look for public implementations
either with similar models or similar datasets, or both.
Ideally, this would involve finding open source code and an available dataset,
but these aren’t always easy to come by, especially for very specific products.
Nevertheless, the fastest way to get started on an ML project is to reproduce
existing results and then build on top of them.
In a domain with as many moving pieces as ML, it is crucial to stand on the
shoulders of giants.
                                              NOTE
    If you’re planning to use open source code or datasets in your work, please make sure that you
    are allowed to do so. Most repositories and datasets will include a license that defines
    acceptable usages. In addition, credit any source you end up using, ideally with a reference to
    their original work.



It can often be a good idea to build a convincing proof of concept before
committing significant resources to a project. Before using time and money to
label data, for example, we need to convince ourselves that we can build a model
that will learn from said data.
So, how do we find an efficient way to start? Like most topics we will cover in
this book, this includes two main parts: data and code.

Open data
You might not always be able to find a dataset that matches your desires, but you
can often find a dataset that is similar enough in nature to be helpful. What does
a similar dataset mean in this context? Thinking about ML models as mapping
an input to an output is helpful here. With this in mind, a similar dataset simply
means a dataset with similar input and output types (but not necessarily
domains).
Frequently, models using similar inputs and outputs can be applied to entirely
different contexts. On the left side of Figure 2-3 are two models that both predict
a text sequence from an image input. One is used to describe photos, while the
other generates HTML code for a website from a screenshot of said website.
Similarly, the right side of Figure 2-3 shows a model that predicts a type of food
from a text description in English, and another that predicts a music genre from a
sheet music transcription.
                  Figure 2-3. Different models with similar inputs and outputs

For example, let’s say we are trying to build a model to predict viewership of
news articles but are struggling to find a dataset of news articles and associated
view counts. We could start with the openly accessible dataset of Wikipedia page
traffic statistics and train a predictive model on it. If we are happy with its
performance, it is reasonable to believe that given a dataset of views for a news
article, our model could perform reasonably well. Finding a similar dataset can
help prove the validity of an approach and makes it more reasonable to spend
resources to acquire data.
This method also works when working on proprietary data. Oftentimes, the
dataset you need for a prediction task may not be easy to access. In some cases,
the data you would need is not being currently collected. In such cases, building
a model that performs well on a similar dataset can often be the best way to
convince stakeholders to build a novel data collection pipeline or facilitate
access to an existing one.
When it comes to publicly accessible data, new data sources and collections
appear regularly. The following are a few that I’ve found useful:

        The Internet archive maintains a set of datasets including website data,
        videos, and books.
        The subreddit r/datasets is dedicated to sharing datasets.
        Kaggle’s Datasets page offers a large selection in a variety of domains.
        The UCI Machine Learning Repository is a vast resource of ML
        datasets.
        Google’s dataset search covers a large searchable index of accessible
        datasets.
        Common Crawl crawls and archives data from across the web and
        makes results publicly available.
        Wikipedia also has a great evolving list of ML research datasets.

For most use cases, one of these sources will provide you with a dataset
sufficiently similar to the one you would need.
Training a model on this tangential dataset will allow you to prototype and
validate your results rapidly. In some cases, you can even train a model on a
tangential dataset and transfer some of its performance to your final dataset
(more on this in Chapter 4).
Once you have an idea of which dataset you’ll start with, it is time to turn your
attention to models. While it can be tempting to simply start building your own
pipeline from scratch, it can often be worthwhile to at least observe what others
have done.

Open source code
Searching for existing code can achieve two high-level goals. It lets us see which
challenges others have faced when doing similar modeling and surfaces potential
issues with the given dataset. For this reason, I recommend looking for both
pipelines tackling your product goal and code working with the dataset you have
chosen. If you find an example, the first step would be to reproduce its results
yourself.
I have seen many data scientists attempt to leverage ML code they found online
only to find that they are unable to train the given models to a similar level of
accuracy claimed by the authors. Because new approaches are not always
accompanied with well-documented and functioning code, ML results are often
hard to reproduce and thus should always be verified.
Similar to your search for data, a good way to find similar codebases is to
abstract your problem to its input and output types and find codebases tackling
problems with similar types.
For example, when attempting to generate HTML code from screenshots of a
website, Tony Beltramelli, the author of the paper, “pix2code: Generating Code
from a Graphical User Interface Screenshot”, realized that his problem boiled
down to translating an image into a sequence. He leveraged existing
architectures and best practices from a field that was more mature and also
generated sequences from images, meaning image captioning! This allowed him
to get excellent results on an entirely new task and leverage years of work in an
adjacent application.
Once you’ve looked at data and at code, you’re ready to move forward. Ideally,
this process has given you a few pointers to start your work and acquire a more
nuanced perspective on your problem. Let’s sum up the situations you can find
yourself in after looking for prior work.

Bring both together
As we just discussed, leveraging existing open code and datasets can help make
implementation faster. In the worst case, if none of the existing models performs
well on an open dataset, you now at least know that this project will require
significant modeling and/or data collection work.
If you have found an existing model that solves a similar task and managed to
train it on the dataset it was originally trained on, all that is left is to adapt it to
your domain. To do so, I recommend going through the following successive
steps:

      1. Find a similar open source model, ideally paired with a dataset it was
         trained on, and attempt to reproduce the training results yourself.
      2. Once you have reproduced the results, find a dataset that is closer to
         your use case, and attempt to train the previous model on that dataset.
      3. Once you have integrated the dataset to the training code, it is time to
         judge how your model is doing using the metrics you defined and start
         iterating.

We’ll explore the pitfalls of each of these steps and how to overcome them
starting in Part II. For now, let’s go back to the case study and review the process
we just described.
ML Editor Planning
Let’s examine common writing advice and search for candidate datasets and
models for the ML editor.

Initial Plan for an Editor
We should start by implementing heuristics based on common writing
guidelines. We’ll gather these rules by searching existing guides for writing and
editing, like those described in “The Simplest Approach: Being the Algorithm”.
Our perfect dataset would consist of questions and their associated quality. First,
we should quickly find a similar dataset that is easier to acquire. Based on
observed performance on this dataset, we will then expand and deepen our
search if needed.
Social media posts and online forums are good examples of text associated with
a quality metric. Since most of these metrics exist to favor useful content, they
often include quality metrics such as “likes” or “upvotes.”
Stack Exchange, a network of Q&A communities, is a popular site for questions
and answers. There’s also an entire anonymized data dump of Stack Exchange
on the Internet Archive, one of the data sources we mentioned earlier. This is a
great dataset to start with.
We can build an initial model by using Stack Exchange questions and trying to
predict a question’s upvotes score from its content. We will also use this
opportunity to look through the dataset and label it, trying to find patterns.
The model we want to build attempts to classify text quality accurately, to then
provide writing recommendations. Many open source models exist for text
classification; check out this popular Python ML library scikit-learn tutorial on
the topic.
Once we have a working classifier, we will cover how to leverage it to make
recommendations in Chapter 7.
Now that we have a potential initial dataset, let’s transition to models and decide
what we should start with.
Always Start with a Simple Model
An important takeaway of this chapter is that the purpose of building an initial
model and dataset is to produce informative results that will guide further
modeling and data gathering work toward a more useful product.
By starting with a simple model and extracting trends of what makes a Stack
Overflow question successful, we can quickly measure performance and iterate
on it.
The opposite approach of trying to build a perfect model from scratch does not
work in practice. This is because ML is an iterative process where the fastest
way to make progress is to see how a model fails. The faster your model fails,
the more progress you will make. We will dive into this iterative process in much
more detail in Part III.
We should keep caveats of each approach in mind, however. For example, the
engagement that a question receives depends on many more factors than just the
quality of its formulation. The context of the post, the community it was posted
in, the popularity of the poster, the time at which it was posted, and many other
details that the initial model will ignore also matter very much. To take such
factors into account, we will restrict our dataset to a subset of communities. Our
first model will ignore all metadata related to a post, but we will consider
incorporating it if it seems necessary.
As such, our model uses what is often referred to as a weak label, one that is
only slightly correlated with the desired output. As we analyze how the model
performs, we will determine whether this label contains enough information for
it to be useful.
We have a starting point, and we can now decide how we will progress. Making
regular progress in ML can often seem hard due to the unpredictable aspect of
modeling. It is hard to know ahead of time to which extent a given modeling
approach will succeed. Because of this, I’d like to share a few tips to make
steady progress.


To Make Regular Progress: Start Simple
It is worth repeating that much of the challenge in ML is similar to one of the
biggest challenges in software—resisting the urge to build pieces that are not
needed yet. Many ML projects fail because they rely on an initial data
acquisition and model building plan and do not regularly evaluate and update
this plan. Because of the stochastic nature of ML, it is extremely hard to predict
how far a given dataset or model will get us.
For that reason, it is vital to start with the simplest model that could address your
requirements, build an end-to-end prototype including this model, and judge its
performance not simply in terms of optimization metrics but in terms of your
product goal.

Start with a Simple Pipeline
In the vast majority of cases, looking at the performance of a simple model on an
initial dataset is the best way to decide what task should be tackled next. The
goal is then to repeat this approach for each of the following steps, making small
incremental improvements that are easy to track, rather than attempting to build
the perfect model in one go.
To do this, we will need to build a pipeline that can take data in and return
results. For most ML problems, there are actually two separate pipelines to
consider.

Training
For your model to be able to make accurate predictions, you first need to train it.
A training pipeline ingests all of the labeled data you would like to train on (for
some tasks, datasets can be so large that they cannot fit on a single machine) and
passes it to a model. It then trains said model on the dataset until it reaches
satisfactory performance. Most often, a training pipeline is used to train multiple
models and compare their performance on a held-out validation set.

Inference
This is your pipeline in production. It serves the results of a trained model to
your user.
At a high level, an inference pipeline starts by accepting input data and
preprocessing it. The preprocessing phase usually consists of multiple steps.
Most commonly, these steps will include cleaning and validating the input,
generating features a model needs, and formatting the data to a numerical
representation appropriate for an ML model. Pipelines in more complex systems
also often need to fetch additional information the model needs such as user
features stored in a database, for example. The pipeline then runs the example
through the model, applies any postprocessing logic, and returns a result.
Figure 2-4 shows a flowchart of a typical inference and training pipeline. Ideally,
the cleaning and preprocessing steps should be the same for both training and
inference pipelines to ensure that a trained model receives data with the same
format and characteristics at inference time.




                 Figure 2-4. Training and inference pipelines are complementary

Pipelines for different models will be built with different concerns in mind, but
generally, the high-level infrastructure remains relatively stable. This is why it is
valuable to start by building both your training and inference pipeline end-to-end
to quickly evaluate the impact bottleneck Monica Rogati mentioned in “Monica
Rogati: How to Choose and Prioritize ML Projects”.
Most pipelines have a similar high-level structure, but because of differences in
the structure of datasets, the functions themselves often have nothing in
common. Let’s illustrate this by looking at the pipeline for the editor.

Pipeline for the ML Editor
For the editor, we will be building both training and inference pipelines using
Python, which is a common language of choice in ML. The goal in this first
prototype is to build an end-to-end pipeline without being too concerned with its
perfection.
As it should be done in any work that takes time, we can, and will, revisit parts
of it to improve them. For training, we will write a pretty standard pipeline, one
broadly applicable to many ML problems and which has a few functions, mainly
ones that:

         Load records of data.
         Clean data by removing incomplete records and input missing values
         when necessary.
         Preprocess and format data in a way that can be understood by a model.
         Remove a set of data that will not be trained on but used to validate
         model results (a validation set).
         Train a model on a given subset of data and return a trained model and
         summary statistics.

For inference, we will leverage some functions from the training pipeline, as
well as writing a few custom ones. Ideally, we would need functions that:

         Load a trained model and keep it in memory (to provide faster results)
         Will preprocess (same as training)
         Gather any relevant outside information
         Will pass one example through a model (an inference function)
         Will postprocess, to clean up results before serving them to users

It is often easiest to visualize a pipeline as a flowchart, such as the one depicted
for Figure 2-5.
                            Figure 2-5. Pipelines for the editor

In addition, we will write various analysis and exploration functions to help us
diagnose problems, such as:
        A function that visualizes examples the model performs the best and
        worst on
        Functions to explore data
        A function to explore model results

Many pipelines contain steps that validate inputs to the model and check its final
outputs. Such checks help with debugging, as you’ll see in Chapter 10, and help
guarantee a standard of quality for an application by catching any poor results
before displaying them to a user.
Remember that when using ML, the outputs of models on unseen data can often
be unpredictable and will not always be satisfactory. For this reason, it is
important to acknowledge that models will not always work and to architect
systems around this potential for mistakes.


Conclusion
We have now seen how to define core metrics that allow us to compare entirely
different models and understand the trade-offs between each of them. We
covered resources and methods to use to speed up the building process of your
first few pipelines. We then outlined an overview of what we’ll need to build for
each pipeline to get a first set of results.
We now have an idea framed as an ML problem, a way to measure progress, and
an initial plan. It is time to dive into the implementation.
In Part II, we will dive into how to build a first pipeline and explore and
visualize an initial dataset.
   Part II. Build a Working Pipeline

Since researching, training, and evaluating models is a time-consuming process,
going in the wrong direction can be very costly in ML. This is why this book
focuses on reducing risk and identifying the highest priority to work on.
While Part I focused on planning in order to maximize our speed and chances of
success, this chapter will dive into implementation. As Figure II-1 shows, in ML
like in much of software engineering, you should get to a minimum viable
product (MVP) as soon as possible. This section will cover just that: the quickest
way to get a pipeline in place and evaluating it.
Improving said model will be the focus of Part III of this book.




 Figure II-1. The right way to build your first pipeline (reproduced with permission from Henrik Kniberg)

We will build our initial model in two steps:
Chapter 3
   In this chapter, we will build the structure and scaffolding of our application.
   This will involve building a pipeline to take user input and return
   suggestions, and a separate pipeline to train our models before we use them.

Chapter 4
   In this chapter, we will focus on gathering and inspecting an initial dataset.
   The goal here is to quickly identify patterns in our data and predict which of
   these patterns will be predictive and useful for our model.
Chapter 3. Build Your First End-
to-End Pipeline

In Part I, we started by covering how to go from product requirements to
candidate modeling approaches. Then, we moved on to the planning stage and
described how to find relevant resources and leverage them to make an initial
plan of what to build. Finally, we discussed how building an initial prototype of
a functioning system was the best way to make progress. This is what we will
cover in this chapter.
This first iteration will be lackluster by design. Its goal is to allow us to have all
the pieces of a pipeline in place so that we can prioritize which ones to improve
next. Having a full prototype is the easiest way to identify the impact bottleneck
that Monica Rogati described in “Monica Rogati: How to Choose and Prioritize
ML Projects”.
Let’s start by building the simplest pipeline that could produce predictions from
an input.


The Simplest Scaffolding
In “Start with a Simple Pipeline”, we described how most ML models consist of
two pipelines, training and inference. Training allows us to generate a high-
quality model, and inference is about serving results to users. See “Start with a
Simple Pipeline” for more about the difference between training and inference.
For the first prototype of an application, we will focus on being able to deliver
results to users. This means that out of the two pipelines we described in
Chapter 2, we will start with the inference pipeline. This will allow us to quickly
examine how users may interact with the output of a model, therefore gathering
useful information to make training a model easier.
If we are only focusing on inference, we will ignore training for now. And since
we are not training a model, we can instead write some simple rules. Writing
such rules or heuristics is often a great way to get started. It is the quickest way
to build a prototype and allows us to see a simplified version of the full
application right away.
While this may seem superfluous if we are aiming to implement an ML solution
anyway (as we will later in the book), it is a critical forcing function to make us
confront our problem and devise an initial set of hypotheses about how best to
solve it.
Building, validating, and updating hypotheses about the best way to model data
are core parts of the iterative model building process, which starts before we
even build our first model!


                                                NOTE
     Here are a couple of examples of great heuristics from projects I have seen used by Fellows I
     mentored at Insight Data Science.

              Code quality estimation: When building a model aiming to predict whether a coder
              performed well on HackerRank (a competitive coding website) from a sample of
              code, Daniel started by counting the number of open and closed parentheses,
              brackets, and curly braces.
              In the majority of proper working code, the counts of opening and closing brackets
              match, so this rule proved to be quite a strong baseline. Furthermore, it gave him the
              intuition to focus his modeling on using an abstract syntax tree to capture even more
              structural information about code.
              Tree counting: When trying to count trees in a city from satellite imagery, after
              looking at some data, Mike started by devising a rule estimating tree density based on
              counting the proportion of green pixels in a given image.
              It turns out that this approach worked for trees that were spread apart but failed when
              it came to groves of trees. Again, this helped define the next modeling steps, which
              focused on building a pipeline that can handle densely grouped trees.




The vast majority of ML projects should start with a similar heuristic. The key is
to remember to devise it based on expert knowledge and data exploration and to
use it to confirm initial assumptions and speed up iteration.
Once you have a heuristic, it is time to create a pipeline that can gather input,
pre-process it, apply your rules to it, and serve results. This could be as simple as
a Python script you could call from the terminal or a web application that gathers
a user’s camera feed to then serve live results.
The point here is to do for your product the same thing we did for your ML
approach, simplify it as much as possible, and build it so you have a simple
functional version. This is often referred to as an MVP (minimum viable
product) and is a battle-tested method for getting useful results as fast as
possible.


Prototype of an ML Editor
For our ML editor, we will leverage common editing recommendations to craft a
few rules about what makes for good or bad questions and display the results of
those rules to users.
For a minimal version of our project that takes user input from the command line
and returns suggestions, we only need to write four functions, shown here:

  input_text = parse_arguments()
  processed = clean_input(input_text)
  tokenized_sentences = preprocess_input(processed)
  suggestions = get_suggestions(tokenized_sentences)


Let’s dive into each of them! We will keep the argument parser simple and start
with taking a string of text from the user, with no options. You can find the
source code for the example and all other code examples in this book’s GitHub
repository.

Parse and Clean Data
First, we simply parse incoming data coming from the command line. This is
relatively straightforward to write in Python.

  def parse_arguments():
      """

      :return: The text to be edited
      """
      parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(
          description="Receive text to be edited"
      )
      parser.add_argument(
          'text',
          metavar='input text',
          type=str
      )
      args = parser.parse_args()
      return args.text


Whenever a model runs on user input, you should start by validating and
verifying it! In our case, users will type in data, so we will make sure that their
input contains characters we can parse. To clean our input, we will remove non-
ASCII characters. This shouldn’t restrict our users’ creativity too much and
allow us to make reasonable assumptions about what is in the text.

  def clean_input(text):
      """

      :param text: User input text
      :return: Sanitized text, without non ascii characters
      """
      # To keep things simple at the start, let's only keep ASCII characters
      return str(text.encode().decode('ascii', errors='ignore'))


Now, we need to preprocess our input and provide recommendations. To get us
started, we will lean on some of the existing research about classifying text we
mentioned in “The Simplest Approach: Being the Algorithm”. This will involve
counting words such as “told” and “said” and computing summary statistics of
syllables, words, and sentences to estimate sentence complexity.
To compute word-level statistics, we need to be able to identify words from
sentences. In the world of natural language processing, this is known as
tokenization.

Tokenizing Text
Tokenization is not straightforward, and most simple methods you can think of,
such as splitting our input into words based on spaces or periods, will fail on
realistic text due to the diversity of ways words can be separated. Consider this
sentence, provided as an example by Stanford’s NLP class, for example:
 “Mr. O’Neill thinks that the boys’ stories about Chile’s capital aren’t
 amusing.”
Most simple methods will fail on this sentence due to the presence of periods
and apostrophes that carry various meanings. Instead of building our own
tokenizer, we will leverage nltk, a popular open source library, which allows us
to do this in two easy steps, as follows:

  def preprocess_input(text):
      """

      :param text: Sanitized text
      :return: Text ready to be fed to analysis, by having sentences and
      words tokenized
      """
      sentences = nltk.sent_tokenize(text)
      tokens = [nltk.word_tokenize(sentence) for sentence in sentences]
      return tokens


Once our output is preprocessed, we can use it to generate features that will help
judge the quality of a question.

Generating Features
The last step is to write a few rules we could use to give advice to our users. For
this simple prototype, we will start by computing the frequency of a few
common verbs and connectors and then count adverb usage and determine the
Flesch readability score. We will then return a report of these metrics to our
users:

  def get_suggestions(sentence_list):
      """
      Returns a string containing our suggestions
      :param sentence_list: a list of sentences, each being a list of words
      :return: suggestions to improve the input
      """
      told_said_usage = sum(
          (count_word_usage(tokens, ["told", "said"]) for tokens in sentence_list)
      )
      but_and_usage = sum(
          (count_word_usage(tokens, ["but", "and"]) for tokens in sentence_list)
      )
      wh_adverbs_usage = sum(
   (
       count_word_usage(
           tokens,
           [
               "when",
               "where",
               "why",
               "whence",
               "whereby",
               "wherein",
               "whereupon",
           ],
       )
       for tokens in sentence_list
    )
)
result_str = ""
adverb_usage = "Adverb usage: %s told/said, %s but/and, %s wh adverbs" % (
    told_said_usage,
    but_and_usage,
    wh_adverbs_usage,
)
result_str += adverb_usage
average_word_length = compute_total_average_word_length(sentence_list)
unique_words_fraction = compute_total_unique_words_fraction(sentence_list)

word_stats = "Average word length %.2f, fraction of unique words %.2f" % (
    average_word_length,
    unique_words_fraction,
)
# Using HTML break to later display on a webapp
result_str += "<br/>"
result_str += word_stats

number_of_syllables = count_total_syllables(sentence_list)
number_of_words = count_total_words(sentence_list)
number_of_sentences = len(sentence_list)

syllable_counts = "%d syllables, %d words, %d sentences" % (
    number_of_syllables,
    number_of_words,
    number_of_sentences,
)
result_str += "<br/>"
result_str += syllable_counts

flesch_score = compute_flesch_reading_ease(
    number_of_syllables, number_of_words, number_of_sentences
)
      flesch = "%d syllables, %.2f flesch score: %s" % (
          number_of_syllables,
          flesch_score,
          get_reading_level_from_flesch(flesch_score),
      )

      result_str += "<br/>"
      result_str += flesch

      return result_str


Voilà, we can now call our application from the command line and see its results
live. It is not very useful yet, but we have a starting point we can test and iterate
from, which we’ll do next.


Test Your Workflow
Now that we’ve built this prototype, we can test our assumptions about the way
we’ve framed our problem and how useful our proposed solution is. In this
section, we will take a look both at the objective quality of our initial rules and
examine whether we are presenting our output in a useful manner.
As Monica Rogati shared earlier, “Frequently, your product is dead even if your
model is successful.” If the method we have chosen excels at measuring question
quality but our product does not provide any advice to users to improve their
writing, our product will not be useful despite the quality of our method.
Looking at our complete pipeline, let’s evaluate both the usefulness of the
current user experience and the results of our handcrafted model.

User Experience
Let’s first examine how satisfying our product is to use, independently of the
quality of our model. In other words, if we imagine that we will eventually get a
model that performs well enough, is this the most useful way to present results to
our users?
If we are building a tree census, for example, we may want to present our results
as a summary of a long-running analysis of an entire city. We may want to
include the number of reported trees, as well as broken-down statistics per
neighborhood, and a measure of the error on a gold standard test set.
In other words, we would want to make sure that the results we present are
useful (or will be if we improve our model). On the flip side, of course, we’d
also like our model to perform well. That is the next aspect we’ll evaluate.

Modeling Results
We mentioned the value of focusing on the right metric in “Measuring Success”.
Having a working prototype early on will allow us to identify and iterate on our
chosen metrics to make sure they represent product success.
As an example, if we were building a system to help users search for rental cars
nearby, we may use a metric such as discounted cumulative gain (DCG). DCG
measures ranking quality by outputting a score that is highest when the most
relevant items are returned earlier than others (see the Wikipedia article on DCG
for more information about ranking metrics). When initially building our tool,
we may have assumed that we wanted at least one useful suggestion to appear in
our first five results. We thus used DCG at 5 to score our model. However, when
having users try the tool, we may notice that users only ever consider the first
three results displayed. In that case, we should change our metric of success
from DCG at 5 to 3.
The goal of considering both user experience and model performance is to make
sure we are working on the most impactful aspect. If your user experience is
poor, improving your model is not helpful. In fact, you may realize you would be
better served with an entirely different model! Let’s look at two examples.

Finding the impact bottleneck
The goal of looking both at modeling results and at the current presentation of
the product is to identify which challenge to tackle next. Most of the time, this
will mean iterating on the way we present results to our users (which could mean
changing the way we train our models) or improving model performance by
identifying key failure points.
While we will dive into error analysis more in Part III, we should identify failure
modes and appropriate ways to resolve them. It is important to determine
whether the most impactful task to work on is in the modeling or product
domain, as they each require different remediations. Let’s see an example of
each:
On the product side
   Let’s say you have built a model that looks at images of research papers and
   predicts whether they will be accepted to top conferences (see Jia-Bin
   Huang’s paper “Deep Paper Gestalt,” which tackles this issue). However,
   you’ve noticed that returning only a probability of rejection to a user is not
   the most satisfying of outputs. In this case, improving your model would not
   be helpful. It would make sense to focus on extracting advice from the model
   so that we can help our users improve their papers and increase their chances
   of being accepted.

On the model side
   You’ve built a credit scoring model and are noticing that with all other
   factors being equal, it assigns higher risks of defaulting to a certain ethnic
   group. This is likely due to a bias in the training data you have been using, so
   you should gather more representative data and build a new cleaning and
   augmentation pipeline to attempt to address this. In this case, regardless of
   the manner in which you present results, the model needs to be fixed.
   Examples like this are common and a reason why you should always dive
   deeper than an aggregate metric and look at the impact of your model on
   different slices of your data. This is what we will do in Chapter 5.
To illustrate this further, let’s go through this exercise for our ML Editor.


ML Editor Prototype Evaluation
Let’s see how our initial pipeline fares both in terms of user experience and
model performance. Let’s start by throwing in a few inputs to our application.
We will start by testing a simple question, a convoluted question, and a full
paragraph.
Since we are using a reading ease score, we would ideally like our workflow to
return a high score for the simple sentence, a low score for the convoluted one,
and suggestions for improving our paragraph. Let’s actually run a few examples
through our prototype.
Simple question:

  $ python ml_editor.py "Is this workflow any good?"
  Adverb usage: 0 told/said, 0 but/and, 0 wh adverbs
  Average word length 3.67, fraction of unique words 1.00
  6 syllables, 5 words, 1 sentences
  6 syllables, 100.26 flesch score: Very easy to read


Convoluted question:

  $ python ml_editor.py "Here is a needlessly obscure question, that"\
  "does not provide clearly which information it would"\
  "like to acquire, does it?"

  Adverb usage: 0 told/said, 0 but/and, 0 wh adverbs
  Average word length 4.86, fraction of unique words 0.90
  30 syllables, 18 words, 1 sentences
  30 syllables, 47.58 flesch score: Difficult to read


Entire paragraph (that you’ll recognize from earlier):

  $ python ml_editor.py "Ideally, we would like our workflow to return a positive"\
  " score for the simple sentence, a negative score for the convoluted one, and "\
  "suggestions for improving our paragraph. Is that the case already?"
  Adverb usage: 0 told/said, 1 but/and, 0 wh adverbs
  Average word length 4.03, fraction of unique words 0.76
  52 syllables, 33 words, 2 sentences
  52 syllables, 56.79 flesch score: Fairly difficult to read


Let’s examine these results using both of the aspects we’ve just defined.

Model
It is unclear whether our results align well with what we would consider quality
writing. The convoluted sentence and the entire paragraph receive a similar
readability score. Now, I will be the first to admit that my prose can sometimes
be difficult to read, but the earlier paragraph is more comprehensible than the
convoluted sentence we tested before it.
The attributes we are extracting from the text are not necessarily the most
correlated with “good writing.” This is usually due to not having defined success
clearly enough: given two questions, how can we say one is better than the
other? When we build our dataset in the next chapter, we will define this more
clearly.
As expected, we have some modeling work to do, but are we even presenting
results in a useful manner?

User Experience
From the results shown earlier, two issues are immediately apparent. The
information we return is both overwhelming and irrelevant. The goal of our
product is to provide actionable recommendations to our users. The features and
readability score are a quality metric but will not help a user decide how to
improve their submission. We may want to boil down our recommendations to a
single score, along with actionable recommendations to improve it.
For example, we could suggest general changes such as using fewer adverbs, or
work at a more granular level by suggesting word- and sentence-level changes.
Ideally, we could present results by highlighting or underlining the parts of the
input that require users’ attention. I’ve added a mock-up of how this could look
in Figure 3-1.




                      Figure 3-1. More actionable writing suggestions

Even if we were not able to directly highlight recommendations in the input
string, our product could benefit from providing recommendations similar to the
ones on the right side of Figure 3-1, which are more actionable than a list of
scores.
Conclusion
We have built an initial inference prototype and used it to evaluate the quality of
our heuristics and the workflow of our product. This allowed us to narrow down
our performance criteria and iterate on the way we would like to present results
to our users.
For the ML Editor, we’ve learned that we should both focus on providing a
better user experience by providing actionable recommendations and improve
our modeling approach by looking at data to more clearly define what makes for
a good question.
In the first three chapters, we’ve used our product goals to define which initial
approach to take, explored existing resources to make a plan for our approach,
and built an initial prototype to validate our plan and assumptions.
Now, it is time to dive into what is often the most overlooked part of an ML
project—exploring our dataset. In Chapter 4, we will see how to gather an initial
dataset, assess its quality, and iteratively label subsets of it to help guide our
feature generation and modeling decisions.
Chapter 4. Acquire an Initial
Dataset

Once you have a plan to solve your product needs and have built an initial
prototype to validate that your proposed workflow and model are sound, it is
time to take a deeper dive into your dataset. We will use what we find to inform
our modeling decisions. Oftentimes, understanding your data well leads to the
biggest performance improvements.
In this chapter, we will start by looking at ways to efficiently judge the quality of
a dataset. Then, we will cover ways to vectorize your data and how to use said
vectorized representation to label and inspect a dataset more efficiently. Finally,
we’ll cover how this inspection should guide feature generation strategies.
Let’s start by discovering a dataset and judging its quality.


Iterate on Datasets
The fastest way to build an ML product is to rapidly build, evaluate, and iterate
on models. Datasets themselves are a core part of that success of models. This is
why data gathering, preparation, and labeling should be seen as an iterative
process, just like modeling. Start with a simple dataset that you can gather
immediately, and be open to improving it based on what you learn.
This iterative approach to data can seem confusing at first. In ML research,
performance is often reported on standard datasets that the community uses as
benchmarks and are thus immutable. In traditional software engineering, we
write deterministic rules for our programs, so we treat data as something to
receive, process, and store.
ML engineering combines engineering and ML in order to build products. Our
dataset is thus just another tool to allow us to build products. In ML engineering,
choosing an initial dataset, regularly updating it, and augmenting it is often the
majority of the work. This difference in workflow between research and industry
is illustrated in Figure 4-1.




            Figure 4-1. Datasets are fixed in research, but part of the product in industry

Treating data as part of your product that you can (and should) iterate on,
change, and improve is often a big paradigm shift for newcomers to the industry.
Once you get used to it, however, data will become your best source of
inspiration to develop new models and the first place you look for answers when
things go wrong.

Do Data Science
I’ve seen the process of curating a dataset be the main roadblock to building ML
products more times than I can count. This is partly because of the relative lack
of education on the topic (most online courses provide the dataset and focus on
the models), which leads to many practitioners fearing this part of the work.
It is easy to think of working with data as a chore to tackle before playing with
fun models, but models only serve as a way to extract trends and patterns from
existing data. Making sure that the data we use exhibits patterns that are
predictive enough for a model to leverage (and checking whether it contains
clear bias) is thus a fundamental part of the work of a data scientist (in fact, you
may have noticed the name of the role is not model scientist).
This chapter will focus on this process, from gathering an initial dataset to
inspecting and validating its applicability for ML. Let’s start with exploring a
dataset efficiently to judge its quality.


Explore Your First Dataset
So how do we go about exploring an initial dataset? The first step of course is to
gather a dataset. This is where I see practitioners get stuck the most often as they
search for a perfect dataset. Remember, our goal is to get a simple dataset to
extract preliminary results from. As with other things in ML, start simple, and
build from there.

Be Efficient, Start Small
For most ML problems, more data can lead to a better model, but this does not
mean that you should start with the largest possible dataset. When starting on a
project, a small dataset allows you to easily inspect and understand your data and
how to model it better. You should aim for an initial dataset that is easy to work
with. Only once you’ve settled on a strategy does it make sense to scale it up to a
larger size.
If you are working at a company with terabytes of data stored in a cluster, you
can start by extracting a uniformly sampled subset that fits in memory on your
local machine. If you would like to start working on a side project trying to
identify the brands of cars that drive in front of your house, for example, start
with a few dozens of images of cars on streets.
Once you have seen how your initial model performs and where it struggles, you
will be able to iterate on your dataset in an informed manner!
You can find many existing datasets online on platforms such as Kaggle or
Reddit or gather a few examples yourself, either by scraping the web, leveraging
large open datasets such as found on the Common Crawl site, or generating data!
For more information, see “Open data”.
Gathering and analyzing data is not only necessary, it will speed you up,
especially early on in a project’s development. Looking at your dataset and
learning about its features is the easiest way to come up with a good modeling
and feature generation pipeline.
Most practitioners overestimate the impact of working on the model and
underestimate the value of working on the data, so I recommend always making
an effort to correct this trend and bias yourself toward looking at data.
When examining data, it is good to identify trends in an exploratory fashion, but
you shouldn’t stop there. If your aim is to build ML products, you should ask
yourself what the best way to leverage these trends in an automated fashion is.
How can these trends help you power an automated product?

Insights Versus Products
Once you have a dataset, it is time to dive into it and explore its content. As we
do so, let’s keep in mind the distinction between data exploration for analysis
purposes and data exploration for product building purposes. While both aim to
extract and understand trends in data, the former concerns itself with creating
insights from trends (learning that most fraudulent logins to a website happen on
Thursdays and are from the Seattle area, for example), while the latter is about
using trends to build features (using the time of a login attempt and its IP address
to build a service that prevents fraudulent accounts logins).
While the difference may seem subtle, it leads to an extra layer of complexity in
the product building case. We need to have confidence that the patterns we see
will apply to data we receive in the future and quantify the differences between
the data we are training on and the data we expect to receive in production.
For fraud prediction, noticing a seasonality aspect to fraudulent logins is the first
step. We should then use this observed seasonal trend to estimate how often we
need to train our models on recently gathered data. We will dive into more
examples as we explore our data more deeply later in this chapter.
Before noticing predictive trends, we should start by examining quality. If our
chosen dataset does not meet quality standards, we should improve it before
moving on to modeling.

A Data Quality Rubric
In this section, we will cover some aspects to examine when first working with a
new dataset. Each dataset comes with its own biases and oddities, which require
different tools to be understood, so writing a comprehensive rubric covering
anything you may want to look for in a dataset is beyond the scope of this book.
Yet, there are a few categories that are valuable to pay attention to when first
approaching a dataset. Let’s start with formatting.

Data format
Is the dataset already formatted in such a way that you have clear inputs and
outputs, or does it require additional preprocessing and labeling?
When building a model that attempts to predict whether a user will click on an
ad, for example, a common dataset will consist of a historical log of all clicks for
a given time period. You would need to transform this dataset so that it contains
multiple instances of an ad being presented to a user and whether the user
clicked. You’d also want to include any features of the user or the ad that you
think your model could leverage.
If you are given a dataset that has already been processed or aggregated for you,
you should validate that you understand the way in which the data was
processed. If one of the columns you were given contains an average conversion
rate, for example, can you calculate this rate yourself and verify that it matches
with the provided value?
In some cases, you will not have access to the required information to reproduce
and validate preprocessing steps. In those cases, looking at the quality of the data
will help you determine which features of it you trust and which ones would be
best left ignored.

Data quality
Examining the quality of a dataset is crucial before you start modeling it. If you
know that half of the values for a crucial feature are missing, you won’t spend
hours debugging a model to try to understand why it isn’t performing well.
There are many ways in which data can be of poor quality. It can be missing, it
can be imprecise, or it can even be corrupted. Getting an accurate picture of its
quality will not only allow you to estimate which level of performance is
reasonable, it will make it easier to select potential features and models to use.
If you are working with logs of user activity to predict usage of an online
product, can you estimate how many logged events are missing? For the events
you do have, how many contain only a subset of information about the user?
If you are working on natural language text, how would you rate the quality of
the text? For example, are there many incomprehensible characters? Is the
spelling very erroneous or inconsistent?
If you are working on images, are they clear enough that you could perform the
task yourself? If it is hard for you to detect an object in an image, do you think
your model will struggle to do so?
In general, which proportion of your data seems noisy or incorrect? How many
inputs are hard for you to interpret or understand? If the data has labels, do you
tend to agree with them, or do you often find yourself questioning their
accuracy?
I’ve worked on a few projects aiming to extract information from satellite
imagery, for example. In the best cases, these projects have access to a dataset of
images with corresponding annotations denoting objects of interest such as fields
or planes. In some cases, however, these annotations can be inaccurate or even
missing. Such errors have a significant impact on any modeling approach, so it is
vital to find out about them early. We can work with missing labels by either
labeling an initial dataset ourselves or finding a weak label we can use, but we
can do so only if we notice the quality ahead of time.
After verifying the format and quality of the data, one additional step can help
proactively surface issues: examining data quantity and feature distribution.

Data quantity and distribution
Let’s estimate whether we have enough data and whether feature values seem
within a reasonable range.
How much data do we have? If we have a large dataset, we should select a
subset to start our analysis on. On the other hand, if our dataset is too small or
some classes are underrepresented, models we train would risk being just as
biased as our data. The best way to avoid such bias is to increase the diversity of
our data through data gathering and augmentation. The ways in which you
measure the quality of your data depend on your dataset, but Table 4-1 covers a
few questions to get you started.

Table 4-1. A data quality rubric
Table 4-1. A data quality rubric
Quality                      Format                                     Quantity and distribution

Are any relevant fields      How many preprocessing steps does          How many examples do you
ever empty?                  your data require?                         have?

Are there potential errors   Will you be able to preprocess it in the   How many examples per
of measurement?              same way in production?                    class? Are any absent?


For a practical example, when building a model to automatically categorize
customer support emails into different areas of expertise, a data scientist I was
working with, Alex Wahl, was given nine distinct categories, with only one
example per category. Such a dataset is too small for a model to learn from, so
he focused most of his effort on a data generation strategy. He used templates of
common formulations for each of the nine categories to produce thousands more
examples that a model could then learn from. Using this strategy, he managed to
get a pipeline to a much higher level of accuracy than he would have had by
trying to build a model complex enough to learn from only nine examples.
Let’s apply this exploration process to the dataset we chose for our ML editor
and estimate its quality!

ML editor data inspection
For our ML editor, we initially settled on using the anonymized Stack Exchange
Data Dump as a dataset. Stack Exchange is a network of question-and-answer
websites, each focused on a theme such as philosophy or gaming. The data dump
contains many archives, one for each of the websites in the Stack Exchange
network.
For our initial dataset, we’ll choose a website that seems like it would contain
broad enough questions to build useful heuristics from. At first glance, the
Writing community seems like a good fit.
Each website archive is provided as an XML file. We need to build a pipeline to
ingest those files and transform them into text we can then extract features from.
The following example shows the Posts.xml file for
datascience.stackexchange.com:

  <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
  <posts>
    <row Id="5" PostTypeId="1" CreationDate="2014-05-13T23:58:30.457"
  Score="9" ViewCount="516" Body="&lt;p&gt; &quot;Hello World&quot; example? "
  OwnerUserId="5" LastActivityDate="2014-05-14T00:36:31.077"
  Title="How can I do simple machine learning without hard-coding behavior?"
  Tags="&lt;machine-learning&gt;" AnswerCount="1" CommentCount="1" />
    <row Id="7" PostTypeId="1" AcceptedAnswerId="10" ... />


To be able to leverage this data, we will need to be able to load the XML file,
decode the HTML tags in the text, and represent questions and associated data in
a format that would be easier to analyze such as a pandas DataFrame. The
following function does just this. As a reminder, the code for this function, and
all other code throughout this book, can be found in this book’s GitHub
repository.

  import xml.etree.ElementTree as ElT


  def parse_xml_to_csv(path, save_path=None):
      """
      Open .xml posts dump and convert the text to a csv, tokenizing it in the
           process
      :param path: path to the xml document containing posts
      :return: a dataframe of processed text
      """

      # Use python's standard library to parse XML file
      doc = ElT.parse(path)
      root = doc.getroot()

      # Each row is a question
      all_rows = [row.attrib for row in root.findall("row")]

      # Using tdqm to display progress since preprocessing takes time
      for item in tqdm(all_rows):
          # Decode text from HTML
          soup = BeautifulSoup(item["Body"], features="html.parser")
          item["body_text"] = soup.get_text()

      # Create dataframe from our list of dictionaries
      df = pd.DataFrame.from_dict(all_rows)
      if save_path:
          df.to_csv(save_path)
      return df


Even for a relatively small dataset containing only 30,000 questions this process
takes more than a minute, so we serialize the processed file back to disk to only
have to process it once. To do this, we can simply use panda’s to_csv function,
as shown on the final line of the snippet.
This is generally a recommended practice for any preprocessing required to train
a model. Preprocessing code that runs right before the model optimization
process can slow down experimentation significantly. As much as possible,
always preprocess data ahead of time and serialize it to disk.
Once we have our data in this format, we can examine the aspects we described
earlier. The entire exploration process we detail next can be found in the dataset
exploration notebook in this book’s GitHub repository.
To start, we use df.info() to display summary information about our
DataFrame, as well as any empty values. Here is what it returns:

  >>>> df.info()

  AcceptedAnswerId        4124 non-null float64
  AnswerCount             33650 non-null int64
  Body                    33650 non-null object
  ClosedDate              969 non-null object
  CommentCount            33650 non-null int64
  CommunityOwnedDate      186 non-null object
  CreationDate            33650 non-null object
  FavoriteCount           3307 non-null float64
  Id                      33650 non-null int64
  LastActivityDate        33650 non-null object
  LastEditDate            10521 non-null object
  LastEditorDisplayName   606 non-null object
  LastEditorUserId        9975 non-null float64
  OwnerDisplayName        1971 non-null object
  OwnerUserId             32117 non-null float64
  ParentId                25679 non-null float64
  PostTypeId              33650 non-null int64
  Score                   33650 non-null int64
  Tags                    7971 non-null object
  Title                   7971 non-null object
  ViewCount               7971 non-null float64
  body_text               33650 non-null object
  full_text               33650 non-null object
  text_len                33650 non-null int64
  is_question             33650 non-null bool


We can see that we have a little over 31,000 posts, with only about 4,000 of them
having an accepted answer. In addition, we can notice that some of the values for
Body, which represents the contents of a post, are null, which seems suspicious.
We would expect all posts to contain text. Looking at rows with a null Body
quickly reveals they belong to a type of post that has no reference in the
documentation provided with the dataset, so we remove them.
Let’s quickly dive into the format and see if we understand it. Each post has a
PostTypeId value of 1 for a question, or 2 for an answer. We would like to see
which type of questions receive high scores, as we would like to use a question’s
score as a weak label for our true label, the quality of a question.
First, let’s match questions with the associated answers. The following code
selects all questions that have an accepted answer and joins them with the text
for said answer. We can then look at the first few rows and validate that the
answers do match up with the questions. This will also allow us to quickly look
through the text and judge its quality.

    questions_with_accepted_answers = df[
        df["is_question"] & ~(df["AcceptedAnswerId"].isna())
    ]
    q_and_a = questions_with_accepted_answers.join(
        df[["Text"]], on="AcceptedAnswerId", how="left", rsuffix="_answer"
    )

    pd.options.display.max_colwidth = 500
    q_and_a[["Text", "Text_answer"]][:5]


In Table 4-2, we can see that questions and answers do seem to match up and
that the text seems mostly correct. We now trust that we can match questions
with their associated answers.

Table 4-2. Questions with their associated answers
Id body_text                              body_text_answer

1    I’ve always wanted to start writing When I’m thinking about where I learned most how to
     (in a totally amateur way), but      write, I think that reading was the most important guide to
     whenever I want to start something me. This may sound silly, but by reading good written
     I instantly get blocked having a lot newspaper articles (facts, opinions, scientific articles, and
     of questions and doubts.\nAre there most of all, criticisms of films and music), I learned how
     some resources on how to start       others did the job, what works and what doesn’t. In my own
     becoming a writer?\nl’m thinking writing, I try to mimic other people’s styles that I liked.
     something with tips and easy           Moreover, I learn new things by reading, giving me a
     exercises to get the ball rolling.\n   broader background that I need when re…

2    What kind of story is better suited    With a story in first person, you are intending the reader to
     for each point of view? Are there      become much more attached to the main character. Since
     advantages or disadvantages            the reader sees what that character sees and feels what that
     inherent to them?\nFor example,        character feels, the reader will have an emotional
     writing in the first person you are    investment in that character. Third person does not have this
     always following a character, while    close tie; a reader can become emotionally invested but it
     in the third person you can “jump”     will not be as strong as it will be in first person.\nContrarily,
     between story lines.\n                 you cannot have multiple point characters when you use
                                            first person without ex…

3    I finished my novel, and everyone      Try to find a list of agents who write in your genre, check
     I’ve talked to says I need an agent.   out their websites!\nFind out if they are accepting new
     How do I find one?\n                   clients. If they aren’t, then check out another agent. But if
                                            they are, try sending them a few chapters from your story, a
                                            brief, and a short cover letter asking them to represent
                                            you.\nIn the cover letter mention your previous publication
                                            credits. If sent via post, then I suggest you give them a
                                            means of reply, whether it be an email or a stamped,
                                            addressed envelope.\nAgents…


As one last sanity check, let’s look at how many questions received no answer,
how many received at least one, and how many had an answer that was accepted.

    has_accepted_answer = df[df["is_question"] & ~(df["AcceptedAnswerId"].isna())]
    no_accepted_answers = df[
        df["is_question"]
        & (df["AcceptedAnswerId"].isna())
        & (df["AnswerCount"] != 0)
    ]
    no_answers = df[
        df["is_question"]
        & (df["AcceptedAnswerId"].isna())
        & (df["AnswerCount"] == 0)
    ]

    print(
        "%s questions with no answers, %s with answers, %s with an accepted answer"
        % (len(no_answers), len(no_accepted_answers), len(has_accepted_answer))
    )

    3584 questions with no answers, 5933 with answers, 4964 with an accepted answer.


We have a relatively even split between answered and partially answered and
unanswered questions. This seems reasonable, so we can feel confident enough
to carry on with our exploration.
We understand the format of our data and have enough of it to get started. If you
are working on a project and your current dataset is either too small or contains a
majority of features that are too hard to interpret, you should gather some more
data or try a different dataset entirely.
Our dataset is of sufficient quality to proceed. It is now time to explore it more in
depth, with the goal of informing our modeling strategy.


Label to Find Data Trends
Identifying trends in our dataset is about more than just quality. This part of the
work is about putting ourselves in the shoes of our model and trying to predict
what kind of structure it will pick up on. We will do this by separating data into
different clusters (I will explain clustering in “Clustering”) and trying to extract
commonalities in each cluster.
The following is a step-by-step list to do this in practice. We’ll start with
generating summary statistics of our dataset and then see how to rapidly explore
it by leveraging vectorization techniques. With the help of vectorization and
clustering, we’ll explore our dataset efficiently.

Summary Statistics
When you start looking at a dataset, it is generally a good idea to look at some
summary statistics for each of the features you have. This helps you both get a
general sense for the features in your dataset and identify any easy way to
separate your classes.
Identifying differences in distributions between classes of data early is helpful in
ML, because it will either make our modeling task easier or prevent us from
overestimating the performance of a model that may just be leveraging one
particularly informative feature.
For example, if you are trying to predict whether tweets are expressing a positive
or negative opinion, you could start by counting the average number of words in
each tweet. You could then plot a histogram of this feature to learn about its
distribution.
A histogram would allow you to notice if all positive tweets were shorter than
negative ones. This could lead you to add word length as a predictor to make
your task easier or on the contrary gather additional data to make sure that your
model can learn about the content of the tweets and not just their length.
Let’s plot a few summary statistics for our ML editor to illustrate this point.

Summary statistics for ML editor
For our example, we can plot a histogram of the length of questions in our
dataset, highlighting the different trends between high- and low-score questions.
Here is how we do this using pandas:

  import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
  from matplotlib.patches import Rectangle

  """
  df contains questions and their answer counts from writers.stackexchange.com
  We draw two histograms:
  one for questions with scores under the median score
  one for questions with scores over
  For both, we remove outliers to make our visualization simpler
  """

  high_score = df["Score"] > df["Score"].median()
  # We filter out really long questions
  normal_length = df["text_len"] < 2000

  ax = df[df["is_question"] & high_score & normal_length]["text_len"].hist(
      bins=60,
      density=True,
      histtype="step",
      color="orange",
      linewidth=3,
      grid=False,
      figsize=(16, 10),
  )

  df[df["is_question"] & ~high_score & normal_length]["text_len"].hist(
      bins=60,
      density=True,
      histtype="step",
      color="purple",
      linewidth=3,
      grid=False,
  )

  handles = [
      Rectangle((0, 0), 1, 1, color=c, ec="k") for c in ["orange", "purple"]
  ]
  labels = ["High score", "Low score"]
  plt.legend(handles, labels)
  ax.set_xlabel("Sentence length (characters)")
  ax.set_ylabel("Percentage of sentences")


We can see in Figure 4-2 that the distributions are mostly similar, with high-
score questions tending to be slightly longer (this trend is especially noticeable
around the 800-character mark). This is an indication that question length may
be a useful feature for a model to predict a question’s score.
We can plot other variables in a similar fashion to identify more potential
features. Once we’ve identified a few features, let’s look at our dataset a little
more closely so that we can identify more granular trends.




            Figure 4-2. Histogram of the length of text for high- and low-score questions


Explore and Label Efficiently
You can only get so far looking at descriptive statistics such as averages and
plots such as histograms. To develop an intuition for your data, you should spend
some time looking at individual data points. However, going through points in a
dataset at random is quite inefficient. In this section, I’ll cover how to maximize
your efficiency when visualizing individual data points.
Clustering is a useful method to use here. Clustering is the task of grouping a set
of objects in such a way that objects in the same group (called a cluster) are
more similar (in some sense) to each other than to those in other groups
(clusters). We will use clustering both for exploring our data and for our model
predictions later (see “Dimensionality reduction”).
Many clustering algorithms group data points by measuring the distance between
points and assigning ones that are close to each other to the same cluster.
Figure 4-3 shows an example of a clustering algorithm separating a dataset into
three different clusters. Clustering is an unsupervised method, and there is often
no single correct way to cluster a dataset. In this book, we will use clustering as
a way to generate some structure to guide our exploration.
Because clustering relies on calculating the distance between data points, the
way we choose to represent our data points numerically has a large impact on
which clusters are generated. We will dive into this in the next section,
“Vectorizing”.
                     Figure 4-3. Generating three clusters from a dataset

The vast majority of datasets can be separated into clusters based on their
features, labels, or a combination of both. Examining each cluster individually
and the similarities and differences between clusters is a great way to identify
structure in a dataset.
There are multiple things to look out for here:
        How many clusters do you identify in your dataset?
        Do each of these clusters seem different to you? In which way?
        Are any clusters much more dense than others? If so, your model is
        likely to struggle to perform on the sparser areas. Adding features and
        data can help alleviate this problem.
        Do all clusters represent data that seems as “hard” to model? If some
        clusters seem to represent more complex data points, make note of them
        so you can revisit them when we evaluate our model’s performance.

As we mentioned, clustering algorithms work on vectors, so we can’t simply
pass a set of sentences to a clustering algorithm. To get our data ready to be
clustered, we will first need to vectorize it.

Vectorizing
Vectorizing a dataset is the process of going from the raw data to a vector that
represents it. Figure 4-4 shows an example of vectorized representations for text
and tabular data.




                     Figure 4-4. Examples of vectorized representations

There are many ways to vectorize data, so we will focus on a few simple
methods that work for some of the most common data types, such as tabular
data, text, and images.
Tabular data
For tabular data consisting of both categorical and continuous features, a
possible vector representation is simply the concatenation of the vector
representations of each feature.
Continuous features should be normalized to a common scale so that features
with larger scale do not cause smaller features to be completely ignored by
models. There are various way to normalize data, but starting by transforming
each feature such that its mean is zero and variance one is often a good first step.
This is often referred to as a standard score.
Categorical features such as colors can be converted to a one-hot encoding: a list
as long as the number of distinct values of the feature consisting of only zeros
and a single one, whose index represents the current value (for example, in a
dataset containing four distinct colors, we could encode red as [1, 0, 0, 0] and
blue as [0, 0, 1, 0]). You may be curious as to why we wouldn’t simply assign
each potential value a number, such as 1 for red and 3 for blue. It is because such
an encoding scheme would imply an ordering between values (blue is larger than
red), which is often incorrect for categorical variables.
A property of one-hot encoding is that the distance between any two given
feature values is always one. This often provides a good representation for a
model, but in some cases such as days of the week, some values may be more
similar than the others (Saturday and Sunday are both in the weekend, so ideally
their vectors would be closer together than Wednesday and Sunday, for
example). Neural networks have started proving themselves useful at learning
such representations (see the paper “Entity Embeddings of Categorical
Variables”, by C. Guo and F. Berkhahn). These representations have been shown
to improve the performance of models using them instead of other encoding
schemes.
Finally, more complex features such as dates should be transformed in a few
numerical features capturing their salient characteristics.
Let’s go through a practical example of vectorization for tabular data. You can
find the code for the example in the tabular data vectorization notebook in this
book’s GitHub repository.
Let’s say that instead of looking at the content of questions, we want to predict
the score a question will get from its tags, number of comments, and creation
date. In Table 4-3, you can see an example of what this dataset would look like
for the writers.stackexchange.com dataset.
Table 4-3. Tabular inputs without any processing
Id Tags                                     CommentCount CreationDate         Score

1    <resources><first-time-author>         7               2010-11-          32
                                                            18T20:40:32.857

2    <fiction><grammatical-person><third-   0               2010-11-          20
     person>                                                18T20:42:31.513

3    <publishing><novel><agent>             1               2010-11-          34
                                                            18T20:43:28.903

5    <plot><short-story><planning>          0               2010-11-          28
     <brainstorming>                                        18T20:43:59.693

7    <fiction><genre><categories>           1               2010-11-          21
                                                            18T20:45:44.067


Each question has multiple tags, as well as a date and a number of comments.
Let’s preprocess each of these. First, we normalize numerical fields:

    def get_norm(df, col):
        return (df[col] - df[col].mean()) / df[col].std()

    tabular_df["NormComment"]= get_norm(tabular_df, "CommentCount")
    tabular_df["NormScore"]= get_norm(tabular_df, "Score")


Then, we extract relevant information from the date. We could, for example,
choose the year, month, day, and hour of posting. Each of these is a numerical
value our model can use.

    # Convert our date to a pandas datetime
    tabular_df["date"] = pd.to_datetime(tabular_df["CreationDate"])

    # Extract meaningful features from the datetime object
    tabular_df["year"] = tabular_df["date"].dt.year
    tabular_df["month"] = tabular_df["date"].dt.month
    tabular_df["day"] = tabular_df["date"].dt.day
    tabular_df["hour"] = tabular_df["date"].dt.hour


Our tags are categorical features, with each question potentially being given any
number of tags. As we saw earlier, the easiest way to represent categorical inputs
is to one-hot encode them, transforming each tag into its own column, with each
question having a value of 1 for a given tag feature only if that tag is associated
to this question.
Because we have more than three hundred tags in our dataset, here we chose to
only create a column for the five most popular ones that are used in more than
five hundred questions. We could add every single tag, but because the majority
of them appear only once, this would not be helpful to identify patterns.

    # Select our tags, represented as strings, and transform them into arrays of tags
    tags = tabular_df["Tags"]
    clean_tags = tags.str.split("><").apply(
        lambda x: [a.strip("<").strip(">") for a in x])

    # Use pandas' get_dummies to get dummy values
    # select only tags that appear over 500 times
    tag_columns = pd.get_dummies(clean_tags.apply(pd.Series).stack()).sum(level=0)
    all_tags = tag_columns.astype(bool).sum(axis=0).sort_values(ascending=False)
    top_tags = all_tags[all_tags > 500]
    top_tag_columns = tag_columns[top_tags.index]

    # Add our tags back into our initial DataFrame
    final = pd.concat([tabular_df, top_tag_columns], axis=1)

    # Keeping only the vectorized features
    col_to_keep = ["year", "month", "day", "hour", "NormComment",
                   "NormScore"] + list(top_tags.index)
    final_features = final[col_to_keep]


In Table 4-4, you can see that our data is now fully vectorized, with each row
consisting only of numeric values. We can feed this data to a clustering
algorithm, or a supervised ML model.

Table 4-4. Vectorized tabular inputs
                       Norm-   Norm-            Creative              Char- Tech-
Id Year Month Day Hour Comment Score            writing Fiction Style acters nique Novel

1    2010 11     18   20    0.165706    0.140501 0       0      0     0       0      0

2    2010 11     18   20    -0.103524   0.077674 0       1      0     0       0      0

3    2010 11     18   20    -0.065063   0.150972 0       0      0     0       0      1

5    2010 11     18   20    -0.103524   0.119558 0       0      0     0       0      0
7    2010 11     18   20   -0.065063   0.082909 0      1      0     0      0        0




                 VECTORIZATION AND DATA LEAKAGE
    You would usually use the same techniques to vectorize data to visualize it
    and to feed it to a model. There is an important distinction, however. When
    you vectorize data to feed it to a model, you should vectorize your training
    data and save the parameters you used to obtain the training vectors. You
    should then use the same parameters for your validation and test sets.
    When normalizing data, for example, you should compute summary
    statistics such as mean and standard deviation only on your training set
    (using the same values to normalize your validation data), and during
    inference in production.
    Using both your validation and training data for normalization, or to decide
    which categories to keep in your one-hot encoding, would cause data
    leakage, as you would be leveraging information from outside your training
    set to create training features. This would artificially inflate your model’s
    performance but make it perform worse in production. We will cover this in
    more detail in “Data leakage”.

Different types of data call for different vectorization methods. In particular, text
data often requires more creative approaches.

Text data
The simplest way to vectorize text is to use a count vector, which is the word
equivalent of one-hot encoding. Start by constructing a vocabulary consisting of
the list of unique words in your dataset. Associate each word in our vocabulary
to an index (from 0 to the size of our vocabulary). You can then represent each
sentence or paragraph by a list as long as our vocabulary. For each sentence, the
number at each index represents the count of occurrences of the associated word
in the given sentence.
This method ignores the order of the words in a sentence and so is referred to as
a bag of words. Figure 4-5 shows two sentences and their bag-of-words
representations. Both sentences are transformed into vectors that contain
information about the number of times a word occurs in a sentence, but not the
order in which words are present in the sentence.




                   Figure 4-5. Getting bag-of-words vectors from sentences

Using a bag-of-words representation or its normalized version TF-IDF (short for
Term Frequency–Inverse Document Frequency) is simple using scikit-learn, as
you can see here:

  # Create an instance of a tfidf vectorizer,
  # We could use CountVectorizer for a non normalized version
  vectorizer = TfidfVectorizer()

  # Fit our vectorizer to questions in our dataset
  # Returns an array of vectorized text
  bag_of_words = vectorizer.fit_transform(df[df["is_question"]]["Text"])


Multiple novel text vectorization methods have been developed over the years,
starting in 2013 with Word2Vec (see the paper, “Efficient Estimation of Word
Representations in Vector Space,” by Mikolov et al.) and more recent
approaches such as fastText (see the paper, “Bag of Tricks for Efficient Text
Classification,” by Joulin et al.). These vectorization techniques produce word
vectors that attempt to learn a representation that captures similarities between
concepts better than a TF-IDF encoding. They do this by learning which words
tend to appear in similar contexts in large bodies of text such as Wikipedia. This
approach is based on the distributional hypothesis, which claims that linguistic
items with similar distributions have similar meanings.
Concretely, this is done by learning a vector for each word and training a model
to predict a missing word in a sentence using the word vectors of words around
it. The number of neighboring words to take into account is called the window
size. In Figure 4-6, you can see a depiction of this task for a window size of two.
On the left, the word vectors for the two words before and after the target are fed
to a simple model. This simple model and the values of the word vectors are then
optimized so that the output matches the word vector of the missing word.




Figure 4-6. Learning word vectors, from the Word2Vec paper “Efficient Estimation of Word Representations
                                    in Vector Space” by Mikolov et al.

Many open source pretrained word vectorizing models exist. Using vectors
produced by a model that was pretrained on a large corpus (oftentimes
Wikipedia or an archive of news stories) can help our models leverage the
semantic meaning of common words better.
For example, the word vectors mentioned in the Joulin et al. fastText paper are
available online in a standalone tool. For a more customized approach, spaCy is
an NLP toolkit that provides pretrained models for a variety of tasks, as well as
easy ways to build your own.
Here is an example of using spaCy to load pretrained word vectors and using
them to get a semantically meaningful sentence vector. Under the hood, spaCy
retrieves the pretrained value for each word in our dataset (or ignores it if it was
not part of its pretraining task) and averages all vectors in a question to get a
representation of the question.

  import spacy

  # We load a large model, and disable pipeline unnecessary parts for our task
  # This speeds up the vectorization process significantly
  # See https://spacy.io/models/en#en_core_web_lg for details about the model
  nlp = spacy.load('en_core_web_lg', disable=["parser", "tagger", "ner",
        "textcat"])

  # We then simply get the vector for each of our questions
  # By default, the vector returned is the average of all vectors in the sentence
  # See https://spacy.io/usage/vectors-similarity for more
  spacy_emb = df[df["is_question"]]["Text"].apply(lambda x: nlp(x).vector)


To see a comparison of a TF-IDF model with pretrained word embeddings for
our dataset, please refer to the vectorizing text notebook in the book’s GitHub
repository.
Since 2018, word vectorization using large language models on even larger
datasets has started producing the most accurate results (see the papers
“Universal Language Model Fine-Tuning for Text Classification”, by J. Howard
and S. Ruder, and “BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for
Language Understanding”, by J. Devlin et al.). These large models, however, do
come with the drawback of being slower and more complex than simple word
embeddings.
Finally, let’s examine vectorization for another commonly used type of data,
images.
Image data
Image data is already vectorized, as an image is nothing more but a
multidimensional array of numbers, often referred to in the ML community as
tensors. Most standard three-channel RGB images, for example, are simply
stored as a list of numbers of length equal to the height of the image in pixels,
multiplied by its width, multiplied by three (for the red, green, and blue
channels). In Figure 4-7, you can see how we can represent an image as a tensor
of numbers, representing the intensity of each of the three primary colors.
While we can use this representation as is, we would like our tensors to capture a
little more about the semantic meaning of our images. To do this, we can use an
approach similar to the one for text and leverage large pretrained neural
networks.
Models that have been trained on massive classification datasets such as VGG
(see the paper by A. Simonyan and A. Zimmerman, “Very Deep Convolutional
Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition”) or Inception (see the paper by C.
Szegedy et al., “Going Deeper with Convolutions”) on the ImageNet dataset end
up learning very expressive representations in order to classify well. These
models mostly follow a similar high-level structure. The input is an image that
passes through many successive layers of computation, each generating a
different representation of said image.
Finally, the penultimate layer is passed to a function that generates classification
probabilities for each class. This penultimate layer thus contains a representation
of the image that is sufficient to classify which object it contains, which makes it
a useful representation for other tasks.
     Figure 4-7. Representing a 3 as a matrix of values from 0 to 1 (only showing the red channel)

Extracting this representation layer proves to work extremely well at generating
meaningful vectors for images. This requires no custom work other than loading
the pretrained model. In Figure 4-8 each rectangle represents a different layer for
one of those pretrained models. The most useful representation is highlighted. It
is usually located just before the classification layer, since that is the
representation that needs to summarize the image best for the classifier to
perform well.
                   Figure 4-8. Using a pretrained model to vectorize images

Using modern libraries such as Keras makes this task much easier. Here is a
function that loads images from a folder and transforms them into semantically
meaningful vectors for downstream analysis, using a pretrained network
available in Keras:

  import numpy as np

  from keras.preprocessing import image
  from keras.models import Model
  from keras.applications.vgg16 import VGG16
  from keras.applications.vgg16 import preprocess_input


  def generate_features(image_paths):
      """
      Takes in an array of image paths
      Returns pretrained features for each image
      :param image_paths: array of image paths
      :return: array of last-layer activations,
      and mapping from array_index to file_path
      """

      images = np.zeros(shape=(len(image_paths), 224, 224, 3))

      # loading a pretrained model
      pretrained_vgg16 = VGG16(weights='imagenet', include_top=True)

      # Using only the penultimate layer, to leverage learned features
      model = Model(inputs=pretrained_vgg16.input,
                    outputs=pretrained_vgg16.get_layer('fc2').output)

      # We load all our dataset in memory (works for small datasets)
      for i, f in enumerate(image_paths):
          img = image.load_img(f, target_size=(224, 224))
          x_raw = image.img_to_array(img)
          x_expand = np.expand_dims(x_raw, axis=0)
          images[i, :, :, :] = x_expand

      # Once we've loaded all our images, we pass them to our model
      inputs = preprocess_input(images)
      images_features = model.predict(inputs)
      return images_features



                           TRANSFER LEARNING
  Pretrained models are useful to vectorize our data, but they can also
  sometimes be entirely adapted to our task. Transfer learning is the process of
  using a model that was previously trained on one dataset or task for a
  different dataset or task. More than simply reusing the same architecture or
  pipeline, transfer learning uses the previously learned weights of a trained
  model as a starting point for a new task.
  Transfer learning can in theory work from any task to any other, but it is
  commonly used to improve performance on smaller datasets, by transferring
  weights from large datasets such as ImageNet for computer vision or
  WikiText for NLP.
  While transfer learning often improves performance, it also may introduce
  an additional source of unwanted bias. Even if you clean your current dataset
  carefully, if you use a model that was pretrained on the entirety of
  Wikipedia, for example, it could carry over the gender bias shown to be
  present there (see the article “Gender Bias in Neural Natural Language
  Processing,” by K. Lu et al.).

Once you have a vectorized representation, you can cluster it or pass your data to
a model, but you can also use it to more efficiently inspect your dataset. By
grouping data points with similar representations together, you can more quickly
look at trends in your dataset. We’ll see how to do this next.

Dimensionality reduction
Having vector representations is necessary for algorithms, but we can also
leverage those representations to visualize data directly! This may seem
challenging, because the vectors we described are often in more than two
dimensions, which makes them challenging to display on a chart. How could we
display a 14-dimensional vector?
Geoffrey Hinton, who won a Turing Award for his work in deep learning,
acknowledges this problem in his lecture with the following tip: “To deal with
hyper-planes in a 14-dimensional space, visualize a 3D space and say fourteen to
yourself very loudly. Everyone does it.” (See slide 16 from G. Hinton et al.’s
lecture, “An Overview of the Main Types of Neural Network Architecture”
here.) If this seems hard to you, you’ll be excited to hear about dimensionality
reduction, which is the technique of representing vectors in fewer dimensions
while preserving as much about their structure as possible.
Dimensionality reduction techniques such as t-SNE (see the paper by L. van der
Maaten and G. Hinton, PCA, “Visualizing Data Using t-SNE”), and UMAP (see
the paper by L. McInnes et al, “UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and
Projection for Dimension Reduction”) allow you to project high-dimensional
data such as vectors representing sentences, images, or other features on a 2D
plane.
These projections are useful to notice patterns in data that you can then
investigate. They are approximate representations of the real data, however, so
you should validate any hypothesis you make from looking at such a plot by
using other methods. If you see clusters of points all belonging to one class that
seem to have a feature in common, check that your model is actually leveraging
that feature, for example.
To get started, plot your data using a dimensionality reduction technique and
color each point by an attribute you are looking to inspect. For classification
tasks, start by coloring each point based on its label. For unsupervised tasks, you
can color points based on the values of given features you are looking at, for
example. This allows you to see whether any regions seem like they will be easy
for your model to separate, or trickier.
Here is how to do this easily using UMAP, passing it embeddings we generated
in “Vectorizing”:

  import umap

  # Fit UMAP to our data, and return the transformed data
  umap_emb = umap.UMAP().fit_transform(embeddings)
  fig = plt.figure(figsize=(16, 10))
  color_map = {
      True: '#ff7f0e',
      False:'#1f77b4'
  }
  plt.scatter(umap_emb[:, 0], umap_emb[:, 1],
              c=[color_map[x] for x in sent_labels],
              s=40, alpha=0.4)


As a reminder, we decided to start with using only data from the writers’
community of Stack Exchange. The result for this dataset is displayed on
Figure 4-9. At first glance, we can see a few regions we should explore, such as
the dense region of unanswered questions on the top left. If we can identify
which features they have in common, we may discover a useful classification
feature.
After data is vectorized and plotted, it is generally a good idea to start
systematically identifying groups of similar data points and explore them. We
could do this simply by looking at UMAP plots, but we can also leverage
clustering.
        Figure 4-9. UMAP plot colored by whether a given question was successfully answered

Clustering
We mentioned clustering earlier as a method to extract structure from data.
Whether you are clustering data to inspect a dataset or using it to analyze a
model’s performance as we will do in Chapter 5, clustering is a core tool to have
in your arsenal. I use clustering in a similar fashion as dimensionality reduction,
as an additional way to surface issues and interesting data points.
A simple method to cluster data in practice is to start by trying a few simple
algorithms such as k-means and tweak their hyperparameters such as the number
of clusters until you reach a satisfactory performance.
Clustering performance is hard to quantify. In practice, using a combination of
data visualization and methods such as the elbow method or a silhouette plot is
sufficient for our use case, which is not to perfectly separate our data but to
identify regions where our model may have issues.
The following is an example snippet of code for clustering our dataset, as well as
visualizing our clusters using a dimensionality technique we described earlier,
UMAP.

  from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
  import matplotlib.cm as cm

  # Choose number of clusters and colormap
  n_clusters=3
  cmap = plt.get_cmap("Set2")

  # Fit clustering algorithm to our vectorized features
  clus = KMeans(n_clusters=n_clusters, random_state=10)
  clusters = clus.fit_predict(vectorized_features)

  # Plot the dimentionality reduced features on a 2D plane
  plt.scatter(umap_features[:, 0], umap_features[:, 1],
              c=[cmap(x/n_clusters) for x in clusters], s=40, alpha=.4)
  plt.title('UMAP projection of questions, colored by clusters', fontsize=14)


As you can see in Figure 4-10, the way we would instinctively cluster the 2D
representation does not always match with the clusters our algorithm finds on the
vectorized data. This can be because of artifacts in our dimensionality reduction
algorithm or a complex data topology. In fact, adding a point’s assigned cluster
as a feature can sometimes improve a model’s performance by letting it leverage
said topology.
Once you have clusters, examine each cluster and try to identify trends in your
data on each of them. To do so, you should select a few points per cluster and act
as if you were the model, thus labeling those points with what you think the
correct answer should be. In the next section, I’ll describe how to do this
labeling work.
                   Figure 4-10. Visualizing our questions, colored by cluster


Be the Algorithm
Once you’ve looked at aggregate metrics and cluster information, I’d encourage
you to follow the advice in “Monica Rogati: How to Choose and Prioritize ML
Projects” and try to do your model’s job by labeling a few data points in each
cluster with the results you would like a model to produce.
If you have never tried doing your algorithm’s job, it will be hard to judge the
quality of its results. On the other side, if you spend some time labeling data
yourself, you will often notice trends that will make your modeling task much
easier.
You might recognize this advice from our previous section about heuristics, and
it should not surprise you. Choosing a modeling approach involves making
almost as many assumptions about our data as building heuristics, so it makes
sense for these assumptions to be data driven.
You should label data even if your dataset contains labels. This allows you to
validate that your labels do capture the correct information and that they are
correct. In our case study, we use a question’s score as a measure of its quality,
which is a weak label. Labeling a few examples ourselves will allow us to
validate the assumption that this label is appropriate.
Once you label a few examples, feel free to update your vectorization strategy by
adding any features you discover to help make your data representation as
informative as possible, and go back to labeling. This is an iterative process, as
illustrated in Figure 4-11.




                          Figure 4-11. The process of labeling data

To speed up your labeling, make sure to leverage your prior analysis by labeling
a few data points in each cluster you have identified and for each common value
in your feature distribution.
One way to do this is to leverage visualization libraries to interactively explore
your data. Bokeh offers the ability to make interactive plots. One quick way to
label data is to go through a plot of our vectorized examples, labeling a few
examples for each cluster.
Figure 4-12 shows a representative individual example from a cluster of mostly
unanswered questions. Questions in this cluster tended to be quite vague and
hard to answer objectively and did not receive answers. These are accurately
labeled as poor questions. To see the source code for this plot and an example of
its use for the ML Editor, navigate to the exploring data to generate features
notebook in this book’s GitHub repository.




                      Figure 4-12. Using Bokeh to inspect and label data

When labeling data, you can choose to store labels with the data itself (as an
additional column in a DataFrame, for example) or separately using a mapping
from file or identifier to label. This is purely a matter of preference.
As you label examples, try to notice which process you are using to make your
decisions. This will help with identifying trends and generating features that will
help your models.

Data Trends
After having labeled data for a while, you will usually identify trends. Some may
be informative (short tweets tend to be simpler to classify as positive or
negative) and guide you to generate useful features for your models. Others may
be irrelevant correlations because of the way data was gathered.
Maybe all of the tweets we collected that are in French happen to be negative,
which would likely lead a model to automatically classify French tweets as
negative. I’ll let you decide how inaccurate that might be on a broader, more
representative sample.
If you notice anything of the sort, do not despair! These kinds of trends are
crucial to identify before you start building models, as they would artificially
inflate accuracy on training data and could lead you to put a model in production
that does not perform well.
The best way to deal with such biased examples is to gather additional data to
make your training set more representative. You could also try to eliminate these
features from your training data to avoid biasing your model, but this may not be
effective in practice, as models frequently pick up on bias by leveraging
correlations with other features (see Chapter 8).
Once you’ve identified some trends, it is time to use them. Most often, you can
do this in one of two ways, by creating a feature that characterizes that trend or
by using a model that will easily leverage it.


Let Data Inform Features and Models
We would like to use the trends we discover in the data to inform our data
processing, feature generation, and modeling strategy. To start, let’s look at how
we could generate features that would help us capture these trends.

Build Features Out of Patterns
ML is about using statistical learning algorithms to leverage patterns in the data,
but some patterns are easier to capture for models than others. Imagine the trivial
example of predicting a numerical value using the value itself divided by 2 as a
feature. The model would simply have to learn to multiply by 2 to predict the
target perfectly. On the other hand, predicting the stock market from historical
data is a problem that requires leveraging much more complex patterns.
This is why a lot of the practical gains of ML come from generating additional
features that will help our models identify useful patterns. The ease with which a
model identifies patterns depends on the way we represent data and how much
of it we have. The more data you have and the less noisy your data is, the less
feature engineering work you usually have to do.
It is often valuable to start by generating features, however; first because we will
usually be starting with a small dataset and second because it helps encode our
beliefs about the data and debug our models.
Seasonality is a common trend that benefits from specific feature generation.
Let’s say that an online retailer noticed that most of their sales happens on the
last two weekends of the month. When building a model to predict future sales,
they want to make sure that it has the potential to capture this pattern.
As you’ll see, depending on how they represent dates, the task could prove quite
difficult for their models. Most models are only able to take numerical inputs
(see “Vectorizing” for methods to transform text and images into numerical
inputs), so let’s examine a few ways to represent dates.

Raw datetime
The simplest way to represent time is in Unix time, which represents “the
number of seconds that have elapsed since 00:00:00 Thursday, 1 January 1970.”
While this representation is simple, our model would need to learn some pretty
complex patterns to identify the last two weekends of the month. The last
weekend of 2018, for example (from 00:00:00 on the 29th to 23:59:59 on the
30th of December), is represented in Unix time as the range from 1546041600 to
1546214399 (you can verify that if you take the difference between both
numbers, which represents an interval of 23 hours, 59 minutes, and 59 seconds
measured in seconds).
Nothing about this range makes it particularly easy to relate to other weekends in
other months, so it will be quite hard for a model to separate relevant weekends
from others when using Unix time as an input. We can make the task easier for a
model by generating features.

Extracting day of week and day of month
One way to make our representation of dates clearer would be to extract the day
of the week and day of the month into two separate attributes.
The way we would represent 23:59:59 on the 30th of December, 2018, for
example, would be with the same number as earlier, and two additional values
representing the day of the week (0 for Sunday, for example) and day of the
month (30).
This representation will make it easier for our model to learn that the values
related to weekends (0 and 6 for Sunday and Saturday) and to later dates in the
month correspond to higher activity.
It is also important to note that representations will often introduce bias to our
model. For example, by encoding the day of the week as a number, the encoding
for Friday (equal to five) will be five times greater than the one for Monday
(equal to one). This numerical scale is an artifact of our representation and does
not represent something we wish our model to learn.

Feature crosses
While the previous representation makes the task easier for our models, they
would still have to learn a complex relationship between the day of the week and
the day of the month: high traffic does not happen on weekends early in the
month or on weekdays late in the month.
Some models such as deep neural networks leverage nonlinear combinations of
features and can thus pick up on these relationships, but they often need a
significant amount of data. A common way to address this problem is by making
the task even easier and introducing feature crosses.
A feature cross is a feature generated simply by multiplying (crossing) two or
more features with each other. This introduction of a nonlinear combination of
features allows our model to discriminate more easily based on a combination of
values from multiple features.
In Table 4-5, you can see how each of the representations we described would
look for a few example data points.

Table 4-5. Representing your data in a clearer way will make it much easier
for your algorithms to perform well
                     Raw data (Unix      Day of week Day of month Cross (DoW /
Human representation datetime)           (DoW)       (DoM)        DoM)

Saturday, December 29,   1,546,041,600   7           29           174
2018, 00:00:00

Saturday, December 29,   1,546,045,200   7           29           174
2018, 01:00:00

…                        …               …           …            …
Sunday, December 30,        1,546,214,399         1                30                210
2018, 23:59:59


In Figure 4-13, you can see how these feature values change with time and
which ones make it simpler for a model to separate specific data points from
others.




  Figure 4-13. The last weekends of the month are easier to separate using feature crosses and extracted
                                                features

There is one last way to represent our data that will make it even easier for our
model to learn the predictive value of the last two weekends of the month.

Giving your model the answer
It may seem like cheating, but if you know for a fact that a certain combination
of feature values is particularly predictive, you can create a new binary feature
that takes a nonzero value only when these features take the relevant
combination of values. In our case, this would mean adding a feature called
“is_last_two_weekends”, for example, that will be set to one only during the last
two weekends of the month.
If the last two weekends are as predictive as we had supposed they were, the
model will simply learn to leverage this feature and will be much more accurate.
When building ML products, never hesitate to make the task easier for your
model. Better to have a model that works on a simpler task than one that
struggles on a complex one.
Feature generation is a wide field, and methods exist for most types of data.
Discussing every feature that is useful to generate for different types of data is
outside the scope of this book. If you’d like to see more practical examples and
methods, I recommend taking a look at Feature Engineering for Machine
Learning (O’Reilly), by Alice Zheng and Amanda Casari.
In general, the best way to generate useful features is by looking at your data
using the methods we described and asking yourself what the easiest way is to
represent it in a way that will make your model learn its patterns. In the
following section, I’ll describe a few examples of features I generated using this
process for the ML Editor.

ML Editor Features
For our ML Editor, using the techniques described earlier to inspect our dataset
(see details of the exploration in the exploring data to generate features
notebook, in this book’s GitHub repository), we generated the following
features:

         Action verbs such as can and should are predictive of a question being
         answered, so we added a binary value that checks whether they are
         present in each question.
         Question marks are good predictors as well, so we have generated a
         has_question feature.
         Questions about correct use of the English language tended not to get
         answers, so we added a is_language_question feature.
         The length of the text of the question is another factor, with very short
         questions tending to go unanswered. This led to the addition of a
         normalized question length feature.
         In our dataset, the title of the question contains crucial information as
         well, and looking at titles when labeling made the task much easier.
         This led to include the title text in all the earlier feature calculations.
Once we have an initial set of features, we can start building a model. Building
this first model is the topic of the next chapter, Chapter 5.
Before moving on to models, I wanted to dive deeper on the topic of how to
gather and update a dataset. To do that, I sat down with Robert Munro, an expert
in the field. I hope you enjoy the summary of our discussion here, and that it
leaves you excited to move on to our next part, building our first model!


Robert Munro: How Do You Find, Label, and
Leverage Data?
Robert Munro has founded several AI companies, building some of the top
teams in artificial intelligence. He was chief technology officer at Figure Eight, a
leading data labeling company during their biggest growth period. Before that,
Robert ran product for AWS’s first native natural language processing and
machine translation services. In our conversation, Robert shares some lessons he
learned building datasets for ML.
Q: How do you get started on an ML project?
A: The best way is to start with the business problem, as it will give you
boundaries to work with. In your ML editor case study example, are you editing
text that someone else has written after they submit it, or are you suggesting
edits live as somebody writes? The first would let you batch process requests
with a slower model, while the second one would require something quicker.
In terms of models, the second approach would invalidate sequence-to-sequence
models as they would be too slow. In addition, sequence-to-sequence models
today do not work beyond sentence-level recommendations and require a lot of
parallel text to be trained. A faster solution would be to leverage a classifier and
use the important features it extracts as suggestions. What you want out of this
initial model is an easy implementation and results you can have confidence in,
starting with naive Bayes on bag of words features, for example.
Finally, you need to spend some time looking at some data and labeling it
yourself. This will give you an intuition for how hard the problem is and which
solutions might be a good fit.
Q: How much data do you need to get started?
A: When gathering data, you are looking to guarantee that you have a
representative and diverse dataset. Start by looking at the data you have and
seeing if any types are unrepresented so that you can gather more. Clustering
your dataset and looking for outliers can be helpful to speed up this process.
For labeling data, in the common case of classification, we’ve seen that labeling
on the order of 1,000 examples of your rarer category works well in practice.
You’ll at least get enough signal to tell you whether to keep going with your
current modeling approach. At around 10,000 examples, you can start to trust in
the confidence of the models you are building.
As you get more data, your model’s accuracy will slowly build up, giving you a
curve of how your performance scales with data. At any point you only care
about the last part of the curve, which should give you an estimate of the current
value more data will give you. In the vast majority of cases, the improvement
you will get from labeling more data will be more significant than if you iterated
on the model.
Q: What process do you use to gather and label data?
A: You can look at your current best model and see what is tripping it up.
Uncertainty sampling is a common approach: identify examples that your model
is the most uncertain about (the ones closest to its decision boundary), and find
similar examples to add to the training set.
You can also train an “error model” to find more data your current model
struggles on. Use the mistakes your model makes as labels (labeling each data
point as “predicted correctly” or “predicted incorrectly”). Once you train an
“error model” on these examples, you can use it on your unlabeled data and label
the examples that it predicts your model will fail on.
Alternatively, you can train a “labeling model” to find the best examples to label
next. Let’s say you have a million examples, of which you’ve labeled only
1,000. You can create a training set of 1,000 randomly sampled labeled images,
and 1,000 unlabeled, and train a binary classifier to predict which images you
have labeled. You can then use this labeling model to identify data points that are
most different from what you’ve already labeled and label those.
Q: How do you validate that your models are learning something useful?
A: A common pitfall is to end up focusing labeling efforts on a small part of the
relevant dataset. It may be that your model struggles with articles that are about
basketball. If you keep annotating more basketball articles, your model may
become great at basketball but bad at everything else. This is why while you
should use strategies to gather data, you should always randomly sample from
your test set to validate your model.
Finally, the best way to do it is to track when the performance of your deployed
model drifts. You could track the uncertainty of the model or ideally bring it
back to the business metrics: are your usage metrics gradually going down? This
could be caused by other factors, but is a good trigger to investigate and
potentially update your training set.


Conclusion
In this chapter, we covered important tips to efficiently and effectively examine a
dataset.
We started by looking at the quality of data and how to decide whether it is
sufficient for our needs. Next, we covered the best way to get familiar with the
type of data you have: starting with summary statistics and moving on to clusters
of similar points to identify broad trends.
We then covered why it is valuable to spend some significant time labeling data
to identify trends that we can then leverage to engineer valuable features.
Finally, we got to learn from Robert Munro’s experience helping multiple teams
build state-of-the-art datasets for ML.
Now that we’ve examined a dataset and generated features we hope to be
predictive, we are ready to build our first model, which we will do in Chapter 5.
            Part III. Iterate on Models

Part I covered best practices to set up an ML project and track its progress. In
Part II, we saw the value of building an end-to-end pipeline as fast as possible
along with exploring an initial dataset.
Because of its experimental nature, ML is very much an iterative process. You
should plan to repeatedly iterate on models and data, following an experimental
loop as pictured in Figure III-1.




                               Figure III-1. The ML loop

Part III will describe one iteration of the loop. When working on ML projects,
you should plan to go through multiple such iterations before expecting to reach
satisfying performance. Here is an overview of the chapters in this part of the
book:
Chapter 5
   In this chapter, we will train a first model and benchmark it. Then, analyze
   its performance in depth and identify how it could be improved.
Chapter 6
   This chapter covers techniques to build and debug models quickly and avoid
   time-consuming errors.

Chapter 7
   In this chapter, we will use the ML Editor as a case study to show how to
   leverage a trained classifier to provide suggestions to users and build a fully
   functioning suggestion model.
Chapter 5. Train and Evaluate
Your Model

In the previous chapters we’ve covered how to identify the right problem to
tackle, make a plan to tackle it, build a simple pipeline, explore a dataset, and
generate an initial set of features. These steps have allowed us to gather enough
information to begin training an adequate model. An adequate model here means
a model that is a good fit for the task at hand and that has good chances of
performing well.
In this chapter, we will start by briefly going over some concerns when choosing
a model. Then, we will describe best practices to separate your data, which will
help evaluate your models in realistic conditions. Finally, we’ll look at methods
to analyze modeling results and diagnose errors.


The Simplest Appropriate Model
Now that we are ready to train a model, we need to decide which model to start
with. It may be tempting to try every possible model, benchmark them all, and
pick the one with the best results on a held-out test set according to some
metrics.
In general, this is not the best approach. Not only is it computationally intensive
(there are many sets of models and many parameters for each model, so
realistically you will only be able to test a suboptimal subset), it also treats
models as predictive black boxes and entirely ignores that ML models encode
implicit assumptions about the data in the way they learn.
Different models make different assumptions about the data and so are suited for
different tasks. In addition, since ML is an iterative field, you’ll want to pick
models that you can build and evaluate quickly.
Let’s first define how to identify simple models. Then, we will cover some
examples of data patterns and appropriate models to leverage them.
Simple Models
A simple model should be quick to implement, understandable, and deployable:
quick to implement because your first model will likely not be your last,
understandable because it will allow you to debug it more easily, and deployable
because that is a fundamental requirement for an ML-powered application. Let’s
start by exploring what I mean by quick to implement.

Quick to implement
Choose a model that will be simple for you to implement. Generally, this means
picking a well-understood model that has multiple tutorials written about it and
that people will be able to help you with (especially if you ask well-formulated
questions using our ML Editor!). For a new ML-driven application, you will
have enough challenges to tackle in terms of processing data and deploying a
reliable result that you should initially do your best to avoid all model
headaches.
If possible, start by using models from popular libraries such as Keras or scikit-
learn, and hold off before diving into an experimental GitHub repository that has
no documentation and hasn’t been updated in the last nine months.
Once your model is implemented, you’ll want to inspect and understand how it
is leveraging your dataset. To do so, you need a model that is understandable.

Understandable
Model explainability and interpretability describe the ability for a model to
expose reasons (such as a given combination of predictors) that caused it to
make predictions. Explainability can be useful for a variety of reasons, such as
verifying that our models are not biased in undesirable ways or explaining to a
user what they could do to improve prediction results. It also makes iterating and
debugging much easier.
If you can extract the features a model relies on to make decisions, you’ll have a
clearer view of which features to add, tweak, or remove, or which model could
make better choices.
Unfortunately, model interpretability is often complex even for simple models
and sometimes intractable for larger ones. In “Evaluate Feature Importance”, we
will see ways to tackle this challenge and help you identify points of
improvement for your model. Among other things, we will use black-box
explainers that attempt to provide explanations of a model’s prediction
regardless of its internal workings.
Simpler models such as logistic regression or decision trees tend to be easier to
explain as they provide some measure of feature importance, which is another
reason they are usually good models to try first.

Deployable
As a reminder, the end goal of your model is to provide a valuable service to
people who will use it. This means when you think of which model to train, you
should always consider whether you will be able to deploy it.
We will cover deployment in Part IV, but you should already be thinking about
questions such as the following:

        How long will it take a trained model to make a prediction for a user?
        When thinking of prediction latency, you should include not only the
        time it takes for a model to output a result, but the delay in between
        when a user submits a prediction request and receives the result. This
        includes any preprocessing steps such as feature generation, any
        network calls, and any postprocessing steps that happen in between a
        model’s output and the data that is presented to a user.
        Is this inference pipeline fast enough for our use case if we take into
        account the number of concurrent users we expect?
        How long does it take to train the model, and how often do we need to
        train it? If training takes 12 hours and you need to retrain your model
        every 4 hours to be fresh, not only will your compute bill be quite
        expensive, but your model will always be out of date.

We can compare how simple models are by using a table such as Figure 5-1. As
the field of ML evolves and new tooling is built, models that may be complex to
deploy or hard to interpret today may become simpler to use, and this table will
need to be updated. For this reason, I suggest you build your own version based
on your particular problem domain.
                     Figure 5-1. Scoring models based on their simplicity

Even among models that are simple, interpretable, and deployable, there are still
many potential candidates. To choose a model, you should also take into account
the patterns you identified in Chapter 4.

From Patterns to Models
The patterns we have identified and the features we have generated should guide
our model choice. Let’s cover a few examples of patterns in the data and
appropriate models to leverage them.

We want to ignore feature scale
Many models will leverage larger features more heavily than smaller ones. This
can be fine in some cases, but undesirable in others. For models using
optimization procedures like gradient descent such as neural networks,
differences in feature scale can sometimes lead to instability in the training
procedure.
If you want to use both age in years (ranging from one to a hundred) and income
in dollars (let’s say our data reaches up to nine figures) as two predictors, you
need to make sure that your model is able to leverage the most predictive
features, regardless of their scale.
You can ensure this by preprocessing features to normalize their scale to have
zero mean and unit variance. If all features are normalized to the same range, a
model will consider each of them equally (at least initially).
Another solution is to turn to models that are not affected by differences in
feature scale. The most common practical examples are decision trees, random
forests, and gradient-boosted decision trees. XGBoost is an implementation of
gradient-boosted trees commonly used in production because of its robustness,
as well as its speed.

Our predicted variable is a linear combination of predictors
Sometimes, there is good reason to believe that we can make good predictions
using only a linear combination of our features. In these cases, we should use a
linear model such as a linear regression for continuous problems or a logistic
regression or naive Bayes classifier for classification problems.
These models are simple, efficient, and often allow for a direct interpretation of
their weights that can help us identify important features. If we believe the
relationships between our features and our predicted variable are more complex,
using a nonlinear model such as a multilayer neural network or generating
feature crosses (see the beginning of “Let Data Inform Features and Models”)
can help.

Our data has a temporal aspect
If we are dealing with time series of data points where the value at a given time
depends on previous values, we would want to leverage models that explicitly
encode this information. Examples of such models include statistical models
such as autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) or recurrent neural
networks (RNN).

Each data point is a combination of patterns
When tackling problems in the image domain, for example, convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have proven useful through their ability to learn translation-
invariant filters. This means that they are able to extract local patterns in an
image regardless of their position. Once a CNN learns how to detect an eye, it
can detect it anywhere in an image, not just in the places that it appeared in the
training set.
Convolutional filters have proven useful in other fields that contain local
patterns, such as speech recognition or text classification, where CNNs have
been used successfully for sentence classification. For an example, see the
implementation by Yoon Kim in the paper, “Convolutional Neural Networks for
Sentence Classification”.
There are many additional points to consider when thinking of the right models
to use. For most classical ML problems, I recommend using this handy flowchart
that the scikit-learn team helpfully provides. It provides model suggestions for
many common use cases.

ML Editor model
For the ML Editor, we would like our first model to be fast and reasonably easy
to debug. In addition, our data consists of individual examples, without a need to
consider a temporal aspect (such as a series of questions, for example). For that
reason, we will start with a popular and resilient baseline, a random forest
classifier.
Once you’ve identified a model that seems reasonable, it is time to train it. As a
general guideline, you should not train your model on the entirety of the dataset
you gathered in Chapter 4. You’ll want to start by holding out some data from
your training set. Let’s cover why and how you should do that.

Split Your Dataset
The main goal of our model is to provide valid predictions for data that our users
will submit. This means that our model will eventually have to perform well on
data that it has never seen before.
When you train a model on a dataset, measuring its performance on the same
dataset only tells you how good it is at making predictions on data it has already
seen. If you only train a model on a subset of your data, you can then use the
data the model was not trained on to estimate how well it would perform on
unseen data.
In Figure 5-2, you can see an example of a split into three separate sets (train,
validation, and test) based on an attribute of our dataset (the author of a
question). In this chapter, we will cover what each of these sets means, and how
to think about them.
   Figure 5-2. Splitting data on author while attributing the right proportion of questions to each split

The first held-out set to consider is the validation set.

Validation set
To estimate how our model performs on unseen data, we purposefully hold out
part of our dataset from training and then use the performance on this held-out
dataset as a proxy for our model’s performance in production. The held-out set
allows us to validate that our model can generalize to unseen data and thus is
often called a validation set.
You can choose different sections of your data to hold out as a validation set to
evaluate your model and train it on the remaining data. Doing multiple rounds of
this process helps control for any variance due to a particular choice of
validation set and is called cross-validation.
As you change your data preprocessing strategy and the type of model you use
or its hyperparameters, your model’s performance on the validation set will
change (and ideally improve). Using the validation set allows you to tune
hyperparameters the same way that using a training set allows a model to tune its
parameters.
After multiple iterations of using the validation set to make model adjustments,
your modeling pipeline can become tailored specifically to performing well on
your validation data. This defeats the purpose of the validation set, which is
supposed to be a proxy for unseen data. For this reason, you should hold out an
additional test set.

Test set
Since we will go through multiple cycles of iteration on our model and measure
its performance on a validation set at each cycle, we may bias our model so that
it performs well on the validation set. This helps our model generalize beyond
the training set but also carries the risk of simply learning a model that performs
well only on our particular validation sets. Ideally, we would want to have a
model that works well on new data that is hence not contained in the validation
set.
For this reason, we usually hold out a third set called a test set, which serves as a
final benchmark of our performance on unseen data, once we are satisfied with
our iterations. While using a test set is a best practice, practitioners sometimes
use the validation set as a test set. This increases the risk of biasing a model
toward the validation set but can be appropriate when running only a few
experiments.
It is important to avoid using performance on the test set to inform modeling
decisions, as this set is supposed to represent the unseen data we will face in
production. Adapting a modeling approach to perform well on the test set risks
leading to overestimating the performance of the model.
To have a model that performs in production, the data you train on should
resemble data produced by users who will interact with your product. Ideally,
any kind of data you could receive from users should be represented in your
dataset. If that is not the case, then keep in mind that your test set performance is
indicative of performance for only a subset of your users.
For the ML Editor, this means that users who do not conform to the
demographics of writers.stackoverflow.com may not be as well served by our
recommendations. If we wanted to address this problem, we should expand the
dataset to contain questions more representative of these users. We could start by
incorporating questions from other Stack Exchange websites to cover a broader
set of topics, or different question and answering websites altogether.
Correcting a dataset in such a manner can be challenging for a side project.
When building consumer-grade products, however, it is necessary to help model
weaknesses be caught early before users are exposed to them. Many of the
failure modes we will cover in Chapter 8 could have been avoided with a more
representative dataset.

Relative proportions
In general, you should maximize the amount of data the model can use to learn
from, while holding out large enough validation and test sets to provide accurate
performance metrics. Practitioners often use 70% of the data for training, 20%
for validation, and 10% for testing, but this depends entirely on the quantity of
data. For very large datasets, you can afford to use a larger proportion of data for
training while still having enough data to validate models. For smaller datasets,
you may need to use a smaller proportion for training in order to have a
validation set that is large enough to provide an accurate performance
measurement.
Now you know why you’d want to split data, and which splits to consider, but
how should you decide which datapoint goes in each split? The splitting methods
you use have a significant impact on modeling performance and should depend
on the particular features of your dataset.

Data leakage
The method you use to separate your data is a crucial part of validation. You
should aim to make your validation/test set close to what you expect unseen data
to be like.
Most often, train, validation, and test sets are separated by sampling data points
randomly. In some cases, this can lead to data leakage. Data leakage happens
when (because of our training procedure) a model receives information during
training that it won’t have access to when being used in front of real users in
production.
Data leakage should be avoided at all costs, because it leads to an inflated view
of the performance of our model. A model trained on a dataset exhibiting data
leakage is able to leverage information to make predictions that it will not have
when it encounters different data. This makes the task artificially easier for the
model, but only due to the leaked information. The model’s performance appears
high on the held-out data but will be much worse in production.
In Figure 5-3, I’ve drawn a few common causes where randomly splitting your
data into sets will cause data leakage. There are many potential causes of data
leakage, and we will explore two frequent ones next.
To start our exploration, let’s tackle the example at the top of Figure 5-3,
temporal data leakage. Then, we will move on to sample contamination, a
category that encompasses the bottom two examples in Figure 5-3.




                Figure 5-3. Splitting data randomly can often lead to data leakage

Temporal data leakage
In time-series forecasting, a model needs to learn from data points in the past to
predict events that have not happened yet. If we perform a random split on a
forecasting dataset, we will introduce data leakage: a model that is trained on a
random set of points and evaluated on the rest will have access to training data
that happens after events it is trying to predict.
The model will perform artificially well on the validation and test sets but fail in
production, because all it has learned is to leverage future information, which is
unavailable in the real world.
Once you are aware of it, temporal data leakage is usually easy to catch. Other
types of data leakage can give a model access to information it should not have
during training and artificially inflate its performance by “contaminating” its
training data. They can often be much harder to detect.
Sample contamination
A common source of data leakage lies in the level at which the randomness
occurs. When building a model to predict the grade students’ essays will receive,
a data scientist I was assisting once found that his model performed close to
perfect on a held-out test set.
On such a hard task, a model that performs so well should be closely examined
as it frequently indicates the presence of a bug or data leakage. Some would say
that the ML equivalent of Murphy’s law is that the more pleasantly surprised you
are by the performance of your model on your test data, the more likely you are
to have an error in your pipeline.
In this example, because most students had written multiple essays, splitting data
randomly led to essays by the same students being present both in the training
and in the test sets. This allowed the model to pick up on features that identified
students and use that information to make accurate predictions (students in this
dataset tended to have similar grades across all their essays).
If we were to deploy this essay score predictor for future use, it would not be
able to predict useful scores for students it hadn’t seen before and would simply
predict historical scores for students whose essays it has been trained on. This
would not be useful at all.
To solve the data leakage in this example, a new split was made at the student
rather than the essay level. This meant that each student appeared either only in
the training set or only in the validation set. Since the task became much harder,
this led to a decrease in model accuracy. However, since the training task was
now much closer to what it would be in production, this new model was much
more valuable.
Sample contamination can happen in nuanced ways in common tasks. Let’s take
the example of an apartment rental booking website. This website incorporates a
click prediction model that, given a user query and an item, predicts whether the
user will click on the item. This model is used to decide which listings to display
to users.
To train such a model, this website could use a dataset of user features such as
their number of previous bookings, paired with apartments that were presented
to them and whether they clicked on them. This data is usually stored in a
production database that can be queried to produce such pairs. If engineers of
this website were to simply query the database to build such a dataset, they
would likely be faced with a case of data leakage. Can you see why?
In Figure 5-4, I’ve sketched out an illustration of what can go wrong by
depicting a prediction for a specific user. At the top, you can see the features that
a model could use in production to provide a click prediction. Here, a new user
with no previous bookings is presented with a given apartment. At the bottom,
you can see the state of the features a few days later when engineers extract data
from the database.




    Figure 5-4. Data leakage can happen for subtle reasons, such as due to a lack of data versioning

Notice the difference in previous_bookings, which is due to user activity that
happened after they were initially presented with the listing. By using a snapshot
of a database, information about future actions of the user was leaked into the
training set. We now know that the user will eventually book five apartments!
Such leakage can lead a model trained with information at the bottom to output a
correct prediction on the incorrect training data. The accuracy of the model on
the generated dataset will be high because it is leveraging data it will not have
access to in production. When the model is deployed, it will perform worse than
expected.
If you take anything away from this anecdote, it is to always investigate the
results of a model, especially if it shows surprisingly strong performance.

ML Editor Data Split
The dataset we are using to train our ML Editor contains questions asked on
Stack Overflow, as well as their answers. At first glance, a random split can
seem sufficient and is quite simple to implement in scikit-learn. We could, for
example, write a function like the one shown here:

  from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split

  def get_random_train_test_split(posts, test_size=0.3, random_state=40):
      """
      Get train/test split from DataFrame
      Assumes the DataFrame has one row per question example
      :param posts: all posts, with their labels
      :param test_size: the proportion to allocate to test
      :param random_state: a random seed
      """
      return train_test_split(
          posts, test_size=test_size, random_state=random_state
      )


There is a potential reach for leakage with such an approach; can you identify it?
If we think back to our use case, we know we would like our model to work on
questions it has not seen before, only looking at their content. On a question and
answering website, however, many other factors can play into whether a
question is answered successfully. One of these factors is the identity of the
author.
If we split our data randomly, a given author could appear both in our training
and validation sets. If certain popular authors have a distinctive style, our model
could overfit on this style and reach artificially high performance on our
validation set due to data leakage. To avoid this, it would be safer for us to make
sure each author appears only in training or validation. This is the same type of
leakage we described in the student grading example earlier.
Using scikit-learn’s GroupShuffleSplit class and passing the feature
representing an author’s unique ID to its split method, we can guarantee that a
given author appears in only one of the splits.

  from sklearn.model_selection import GroupShuffleSplit

  def get_split_by_author(
      posts, author_id_column="OwnerUserId", test_size=0.3, random_state=40
  ):
      """
      Get train/test split
      Guarantee every author only appears in one of the splits
      :param posts: all posts, with their labels
      :param author_id_column: name of the column containing the author_id
      :param test_size: the proportion to allocate to test
      :param random_state: a random seed
      """
      splitter = GroupShuffleSplit(
          n_splits=1, test_size=test_size, random_state=random_state
      )
      splits = splitter.split(posts, groups=posts[author_id_column])
      return next(splits)


To see a comparison between both splitting methods, refer to the splitting data
notebook in this book’s GitHub repository.
Once a dataset is split, a model can be fit to the training set. We’ve covered the
required parts of a training pipeline in “Start with a Simple Pipeline”. In the
training of a simple model notebook in the GitHub repository for this book, I
show an example of an end-to-end training pipeline for the ML Editor. We will
analyze the results of this pipeline.
We’ve covered the main risks we want to keep in mind when splitting data, but
what should we do once our dataset is split and we’ve trained a model on the
training split? In the next section, we’ll talk about different practical ways to
evaluate trained models and how to leverage them best.

Judge Performance
Now that we have split our data, we can train our model and judge how it
performed. Most models are trained to minimize a cost function, which
represents how far a model’s predictions are from the true labels. The smaller the
value of the cost function, the better the model fits the data. Which function you
minimize depends on your model and your problem, but it is generally a good
idea to take a look at its value both on the training set and on the validation set.
This commonly helps estimate the bias-variance trade-off of our model, which
measures the degree to which our model has learned valuable generalizable
information from the data, without memorizing the details of our training set.


                                      NOTE
     I’m assuming familiarity with standard classification metrics, but here is a short reminder just
     in case. For classification problems, accuracy represents the proportion of examples a model
     predicts correctly. In other words, it is the proportion of true results, which are both true
     positives and true negatives. In cases with a strong imbalance, a high accuracy can mask a poor
     model. If 99% of cases are positive, a model that always predicts the positive class will have
     99% accuracy but may not be very useful. Precision, recall, and f1 score address this
     limitation. Precision is the proportion of true positives among examples predicted as positive.
     Recall is the proportion of true positives among elements that had a positive label. The f1 score
     is the harmonic mean of precision and recall.



In the training of a simple model notebook in this book’s GitHub repository, we
train a first version of a random forest using TF-IDF vectors and the features we
identified in “ML Editor Features”.
Here are the accuracy, precision, recall, and f1 scores for our training set and our
validation set.

  Training accuracy = 0.585, precision = 0.582, recall = 0.585, f1 = 0.581
  Validation accuracy = 0.614, precision = 0.615, recall = 0.614, f1 = 0.612


Taking a quick look at these metrics allows us to notice two things:

          Since we have a balanced dataset consisting of two classes, picking a
          class at random for every example would give us roughly 50%
          accuracy. Our model’s accuracy reaches 61%, better than a random
          baseline.
          Our accuracy on the validation set is higher than on the training set. It
          seems our model works well on unseen data.

Let’s dive deeper to find out more about the performance of the model.

Bias variance trade-off
Weak performance on the training set is a symptom of high bias, also called
underfitting, which means a model has failed to capture useful information: it is
not even able to perform well on data points it has already been given the label
for.
Strong performance on the training set but weak performance on the validation
set is a symptom of high variance, also called overfitting, meaning that a model
has found ways to learn the input/output mapping for the data it has been trained
on, but what it has learned does not generalize to unseen data.
Underfitting and overfitting are two extreme cases of the bias-variance trade-off,
which describes how the types of errors a model makes change as its complexity
increases. As model complexity grows, variance increases and bias decreases,
and the model goes from underfitting to overfitting. You can see this depicted in
Figure 5-5.




         Figure 5-5. As complexity increases, bias decreases but variance increases as well

In our case, since our validation performance is better than our training
performance, we can see that our model is not overfitting the training data. We
can likely increase the complexity of our model or features to improve
performance. Fighting the bias-variance trade-off requires finding an optimal
point between reducing bias, which increases a model’s performance on the
training set, and reducing variance, which increases its performance on the
validation set (often worsening training performance as a byproduct).
Performance metrics help generate an aggregate perspective of a model’s
performance. This is helpful to guess how a model is doing but does not provide
much intuition as to what precisely a model is succeeding or failing at. To
improve our model, we need to dive deeper.

Going beyond aggregate metrics
A performance metric helps determine whether a model has learned correctly
from a dataset or whether it needs to be improved. The next step is to examine
results further in order to understand in which way a model is failing or
succeeding. This is crucial for two reasons:
Performance validation
   Performance metrics can be very deceptive. When working on a
   classification problem with severely imbalanced data such as predicting a
   rare disease that appears in fewer than 1% of patients, any model that always
   predicts that a patient is healthy will reach an accuracy of 99%, even though
   it has no predictive power at all. There exists performance metrics suited for
   most problems (the f1 score would work better for the previous problem),
   but the key is to remember that they are aggregate metrics and paint an
   incomplete picture of the situation. To trust the performance of a model, you
   need to inspect results at a more granular level.

Iteration
   Model building is an iterative process, and the best way to start an iteration
   loop is by identifying both what to improve and how to improve it.
   Performance metrics do not help identify where a model is struggling and
   which part of the pipeline needs improvement. Too often, I’ve seen data
   scientists try to improve model performance by simply trying many other
   models or hyperparameters, or building additional features haphazardly. This
   approach amounts to throwing darts at the wall while blindfolded. The key to
   building successful models quickly is to identify and address specific reasons
   models are failing.
With these two motivations in mind, we will cover a few ways to dive deeper
into the performance of a model.


Evaluate Your Model: Look Beyond Accuracy
There are a myriad of ways to inspect how a model is performing, and we will
not cover every potential evaluation method. We will focus on a few that are
often helpful to tease out what might be happening below the surface.
When it comes to investigating model performance, think of yourself as a
detective and each of the methods covered next as different ways to surface
clues. We’ll start by covering multiple techniques that contrast a model’s
prediction with the data to uncover interesting patterns.

Contrast Data and Predictions
The first step to evaluating a model in depth is to find more granular ways than
aggregate metrics to contrast data and predictions. We’d like to break down
aggregate performance metrics such as accuracy, precision, or recall on different
subsets of our data. Let’s see how to do this for the common ML challenge of
classification.
You can find all the code examples in the comparing data to predictions
notebook in this book’s GitHub repository.
For classification problems, I usually recommend starting by looking at a
confusion matrix, shown in Figure 5-6, whose rows represent each true class,
and columns represent the predictions of our model. A model with perfect
predictions will have a confusion matrix with zeros everywhere except in the
diagonal going from the top left to the bottom right. In reality, that is rarely the
case. Let’s take a look at why a confusion matrix is often very useful.

Confusion Matrix
A confusion matrix allows us at a glance to see whether our model is particularly
successful on certain classes and struggles on some others. This is particularly
useful for datasets with many different classes or classes that are imbalanced.
Oftentimes, I’ve seen models with impressive accuracy show a confusion matrix
with one column entirely empty, meaning that there is a class that the model
never predicts. This often happens for rare classes and can sometimes be
harmless. If the rare class represents an important outcome, however, such as a
borrower defaulting on a loan, a confusion matrix will help us notice the
problem. We can then correct it by weighing the rare class more heavily in our
model’s loss function, for example.
The top row of Figure 5-6 shows that the initial model we’ve trained does well
when it comes to predicting low-quality questions. The bottom row shows that
the model struggles to detect all high-quality questions. Indeed, out of all the
questions that received a high score, our model only predicts their class correctly
half of the time. Looking at the right column, however, we can see that when the
model predicts that a question is high quality, its prediction tends to be accurate.
Confusion matrices can be even more useful when working on problems with
more than two classes. For example, I once worked with an engineer who was
trying to classify words from speech utterances who plotted a confusion matrix
for his latest model. He immediately noticed two symmetrical, off-diagonal
values that were abnormally high. These two classes (which each represented a
word) were confusing the model and the cause of a majority of its errors. Upon
further inspection, it turns out that the words that were confusing the model were
when and where. Gathering additional data for these two examples was enough
to help the model better differentiate these similar-sounding words.
A confusion matrix allows us to compare a model’s predictions with the true
classes for each class. When debugging models, we may want to look deeper
than their predictions and examine the probabilities output by the model.
        Figure 5-6. Confusion matrix for an initial baseline on our question classification task


ROC Curve
For binary classification problems, receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves can also be very informative. An ROC curve plots the true positive rate
(TPR) as a function of the false positive rate (FPR).
The vast majority of models used in classification return a probability score that
a given example belongs to a certain class. This means that at inference time, we
can choose to attribute an example to a certain class if the probability given by
the model is above a certain threshold. This is usually called the decision
threshold.
By default, most classifiers use a probability of 50% for their decision threshold,
but this is something we can change based on our use case. By varying the
threshold regularly from 0 to 1 and measuring the TPR and FPR at each point,
we obtain an ROC curve.
Once we have a model’s prediction probability and the associated true labels,
getting FPRs and TPRs is simple using scikit-learn. We can then generate an
ROC curve.

  from sklearn.metrics import roc_curve

  fpr, tpr, thresholds = roc_curve(true_y, predicted_proba_y)


Two details are important to understand for ROC curves such as the one plotted
in Figure 5-7. First, the diagonal line going between the bottom left to the top
right represents guessing randomly. This means that to beat a random baseline, a
classifier/threshold pair should be above this line. In addition, the perfect model
would be represented by the green dotted line on the top left.
                        Figure 5-7. ROC curve for an initial model

Because of these two details, classification models often use the area under the
curve (AUC) to represent performance. The larger the AUC, the closer to a
“perfect” model our classifier could be. A random model will have an AUC of
0.5, while a perfect model has an AUC of 1. When concerning ourselves with a
practical application, however, we should choose one specific threshold that
gives us the most useful TPR/FPR ratio for our use case.
For that reason, I recommend adding vertical or horizontal lines to an ROC
curve that represent our product needs. When building a system that routes
customer requests to staff if it is deemed urgent enough, the FPR you can afford
is then entirely determined by the capacity of your support staff and the number
of users you have. This means that any models with an FPR higher than that
limit should not even be considered.
Plotting a threshold on an ROC curve allows you to have a more concrete goal
than simply getting the largest AUC score. Make sure your efforts count toward
your goal!
Our ML Editor model classifies questions as good or bad. In this context, the
TPR represents the proportion of high-quality questions our model correctly
judges as good. The FPR is the proportion of bad questions our model claims is
good. If we do not help our users, we’d like to at least guarantee we don’t harm
them. This means that we should not use any model that risks recommending
bad questions too frequently. We should thus set a threshold for our FPR, such as
10%, for example, and use the best model we can find under that threshold. In
Figure 5-8, you can see this requirement represented on our ROC curve; it has
significantly reduced the space of acceptable decision thresholds for models.
An ROC curve gives us a more nuanced view of how a model’s performance
changes as we make its predictions more or less conservative. Another way to
look at a model’s prediction probability is to compare its distributions with the
true class distributions to see whether it is well calibrated.
                  Figure 5-8. Adding ROC lines representing our product need


Calibration Curve
Calibration plots are another informative plot for binary classification tasks, as
they can help us get a sense for whether our model’s outputted probability
represents its confidence well. A calibration plot shows the fraction of true
positive examples as a function of the confidence of our classifier.
For example, out of all the data points our classifier gives a probability of being
classified as positive that is higher than 80%, how many of those data points are
actually positive? A calibration curve for a perfect model will be a diagonal line
from bottom left to top right.
In Figure 5-9, we can see at the top that our model is well calibrated between .2
and .7, but not for probabilities outside of that range. Taking a look at the
histogram of predicted probabilities below reveals that our model very rarely
predicts probabilities outside of that range, which is likely leading to the extreme
results shown earlier. The model is rarely confident in its predictions.




Figure 5-9. A calibration curve: the diagonal line represents a perfect model (top); histogram of predicted
                                             values (bottom)

For many problems, such as predicting CTR in ad serving, the data will lead to
our models being quite skewed when probabilities get close to 0 or 1, and a
calibration curve will help us see this at a glance.
To diagnose the performance of a model, it can be valuable to visualize
individual predictions. Let’s cover methods to make this visualization process
efficient.

Dimensionality Reduction for Errors
We described vectorization and dimensionality reduction techniques for data
exploration in “Vectorizing” and “Dimensionality reduction”. Let’s see how the
same techniques can be used to make error analysis more efficient.
When we first covered how to use dimensionality reduction methods to visualize
data, we colored each point in a dataset by its class to observe the topology of
labels. When analyzing model errors, we can use different color schemes to
identify errors.
To identify error trends, color each data point by whether a model’s prediction
was correct or not. This will allow you to identify types of similar data points a
model performs poorly on. Once you identify a region in which a model
performs poorly, visualize a few data points in it. Visualizing hard examples is a
great way to generate features represented in these examples to help a model fit
them better.
To help surface trends in hard examples, you can also use the clustering methods
from “Clustering”. After clustering data, measure model performance on each
cluster and identify clusters where the model performs worst. Inspect data points
in these clusters to help you generate more features.
Dimensionality reduction techniques are one way of surfacing challenging
examples. To do so, we can also directly use a model’s confidence score.

The Top-k Method
Finding dense error regions helps identify failure modes for a model. Above, we
used dimensionality reduction to help us find such regions, but we can also
directly use a model itself. By leveraging prediction probabilities, we can
identify data points that were most challenging or for which a model was most
uncertain. Let’s call this approach the top-k method.
The top-k method is straightforward. First, pick a manageable number of
examples to visualize that we will call k. For a personal project where a single
person will be visualizing results, start with ten to fifteen examples. For each
class or cluster you have previously found, visualize:
        The k best performing examples
        The k worst performing examples
        The k most uncertain examples

Visualizing these examples will help you identify examples that are easy, hard,
or confusing to your model. Let’s dive into each category in more detail.

The k best performing examples
First, display the k examples your model predicted correctly and was most
confident about. When visualizing those examples, aim to identify any
commonality in feature value among them that could explain model
performance. This will help you identify features that are successfully leveraged
by a model.
After visualizing successful examples to identify features leveraged by a model,
plot unsuccessful ones to identify features it fails to pick up on.

The k worst performing examples
Display the k examples your model predicted incorrectly and was most confident
about. Start with k examples in training data and then validation.
Just like visualizing error clusters, visualizing k examples that a model performs
the worst on in a training set can help identify trends in data points the model
fails on. Display these data points to help you identify additional features that
would make them easier for a model.
When exploring an initial model’s error for the ML Editor, for example, I found
that some questions posted received a low score because they did not contain an
actual question. The model was not initially able to predict a low score for such
questions, so I added a feature to count question marks in the body of the text.
Adding this feature allowed the model to make accurate predictions for these
“nonquestion” questions.
Visualizing the k worst examples in the validation data can help identify
examples that significantly differ from the training data. If you do identify
examples in the validation set that are too hard, refer to tips in “Split Your
Dataset” to update your data splitting strategy.
Finally, models are not always confidently right or wrong; they can also output
uncertain predictions. I’ll cover those next.

The k most uncertain examples
Visualizing the k most uncertain examples consists of displaying examples for
which a model was least confident in its predictions. For a classification model,
which this book focuses mostly on, uncertain examples are ones where a model
outputs as close to an equal probability as possible for each class.
If a model is well calibrated (see “Calibration Curve” for an explanation of
calibration), it will output uniform probabilities for examples that a human
labeler would be uncertain about as well. For a cat versus dog classifier, for
example, a picture containing both a dog and a cat would fall into that category.
Uncertain examples in the training set are often a symptom of conflicting labels.
Indeed, if a training set contains two duplicate or similar examples that are each
labeled a different class, a model will minimize its loss during training by
outputting an equal probability for each class when presented with this example.
Conflicting labels thus lead to uncertain predictions, and you can use the top-k
method to attempt to find these examples.
Plotting the top-k most uncertain examples in your validation set can help find
gaps in your training data. Validation examples that a model is uncertain about
but are clear to a human labeler are often a sign that the model has not been
exposed to this kind of data in its training set. Plotting the top-k uncertain
examples for a validation set can help identify data types that should be present
in the training set.
Top-k evaluation can be implemented in a straightforward manner. In the next
section, I’ll share a working example.

Top-k implementation tips
The following is a simple top-k implementation that works with pandas
DataFrames. The function takes as input a DataFrame containing predicted
probabilities and labels and returns each of the top-k above. It can be found in
this book’s GitHub repository.

  def get_top_k(df, proba_col, true_label_col, k=5, decision_threshold=0.5):
      """
      For binary classification problems
      Returns k most correct and incorrect example for each class
      Also returns k most unsure examples
      :param df: DataFrame containing predictions, and true labels
      :param proba_col: column name of predicted probabilities
      :param true_label_col: column name of true labels
      :param k: number of examples to show for each category
      :param decision_threshold: classifier decision boundary to classify as
             positive
      :return: correct_pos, correct_neg, incorrect_pos, incorrect_neg, unsure
      """
      # Get correct and incorrect predictions
      correct = df[
          (df[proba_col] > decision_threshold) == df[true_label_col]
      ].copy()
      incorrect = df[
          (df[proba_col] > decision_threshold) != df[true_label_col]
      ].copy()

      top_correct_positive = correct[correct[true_label_col]].nlargest(
          k, proba_col
      )
      top_correct_negative = correct[~correct[true_label_col]].nsmallest(
          k, proba_col
      )

      top_incorrect_positive = incorrect[incorrect[true_label_col]].nsmallest(
          k, proba_col
      )
      top_incorrect_negative = incorrect[~incorrect[true_label_col]].nlargest(
          k, proba_col
      )

      # Get closest examples to decision threshold
      most_uncertain = df.iloc[
          (df[proba_col] - decision_threshold).abs().argsort()[:k]
      ]

      return (
          top_correct_positive,
          top_correct_negative,
          top_incorrect_positive,
          top_incorrect_negative,
          most_uncertain,
      )


Let’s illustrate the top-k method by using it for the ML Editor.

Top-k method for the ML Editor
We’ll apply the top-k method to the first classifier that we trained. A notebook
containing usage examples for the top-k method is available in this book’s
GitHub repository.
Figure 5-10 shows the top two most correct examples for each class for our first
ML Editor model. The feature that differs the most between both classes is
text_len, which represents the length of the text. The classifier has learned that
good questions tend to be long, and poor ones are short. It relies heavily on text
length to discriminate between classes.




                             Figure 5-10. Top-k most correct

Figure 5-11 confirms this hypothesis. The unanswered questions our classifier
predicts as most likely to be answered are the longest ones, and vice versa. This
observation also corroborates what we found in “Evaluate Feature Importance”,
where we saw text_len was the most important feature.
                            Figure 5-11. Top-k most incorrect

We’ve established that the classifier leverages text_len to easily identify
answered and unanswered questions, but that this feature is not sufficient and
leads to misclassifications. We should add more features to improve our model.
Visualizing more than two examples would help identify more candidate
features.
Using the top-k method on both training and validation data helps identify limits
of both our model and dataset. We’ve covered how it can help identify whether a
model has the capacity to represent data, whether a dataset is balanced enough,
and whether it contains enough representative examples.
We mostly covered evaluation methods for classification models, since such
models are applicable for many concrete problems. Let’s briefly take a look at
ways to inspect performance when not doing classification.

Other Models
Many models can be evaluated using a classification framework. In object
detection, for example, where the goal is for a model to output bounding boxes
around objects of interest in an image, accuracy is a common metric. Since each
image can have multiple bounding boxes representing objects and predictions,
calculating an accuracy requires an additional step. First, computing the overlap
between predictions and labels (often using the Jaccard index) allows each
prediction to be marked as correct or incorrect. From there, one can calculate
accuracy and use all the previous methods in this chapter.
Similarly, when building models aiming to recommend content, the best way to
iterate is often to test the model on a variety of categories and report its
performance. The evaluation then becomes similar to a classification problem,
where each category represents a class.
For types of problems where such methods may prove tricky, such as with
generative models, you can still use your previous exploration of data to separate
a dataset in multiple categories and generate performance metrics for each
category.
When I worked with a data scientist building a sentence simplification model,
examining the model’s performance conditioned on sentence length showed that
longer sentences proved much harder for the model. This took inspection and
hand labeling but led to a clear next action step of augmenting the training data
with longer sentences, which helped improve performance significantly.
We’ve covered many ways to inspect a model’s performance by contrasting its
predictions with labels, but we can also inspect the model itself. If a model isn’t
performing well at all, it may be worthwhile to try to interpret its predictions.


Evaluate Feature Importance
An additional way to analyze a model’s performance is to inspect which features
of the data it is using to make predictions. Doing so is called feature importance
analysis. Evaluating feature importance is helpful to eliminate or iterate on
features that are currently not helping the model. Feature importance can also
help identify features that are suspiciously predictive, which is often a sign of
data leakage. We will start by generating feature importance for models that can
do so easily and then cover cases where such features may not be easy to extract
directly.

Directly from a Classifier
To validate that a model is working correctly, visualize which features the model
is using or ignoring. For simple models such as regression or decision trees,
extracting the importance of features is straightforward by looking at the learned
parameters of the model.
For the first model we used in the ML Editor case study, which is a random
forest, we can simply use scikit-learn’s API to obtain a ranked list of the
importance of all features. The feature importance code and its usages can be
found in the feature importance notebook in this book’s GitHub repository.

  def get_feature_importance(clf, feature_names):
      importances = clf.feature_importances_
      indices_sorted_by_importance = np.argsort(importances)[::-1]
      return list(
          zip(
               feature_names[indices_sorted_by_importance],
               importances[indices_sorted_by_importance],
          )
      )


If we use the function above on our trained model, with some simple list
processing we can get a simple list of the ten most informative features:

  Top 10 importances:

  text_len: 0.0091
  are: 0.006
  what: 0.0051
  writing: 0.0048
  can: 0.0043
  ve: 0.0041
  on: 0.0039
  not: 0.0039
  story: 0.0039
  as: 0.0038


There are a few things to notice here:
        The length of the text is the most informative feature.
        The other features we generated do not appear at all, with importances
        more than an order of magnitude lower than others. The model was not
        able to leverage them to meaningfully separate classes.
        The other features represent either very common words, or nouns
        relevant to the topic of writing.
Because our model and features are simple, these results can actually give us
ideas for new features to build. We could, for example, add a feature that counts
the usage of common and rare words to see if they are predictive of an answer
receiving a high score.
If features or models become complex, generating feature importances requires
using model explainability tools.

Black-Box Explainers
When features become complicated, feature importances can become harder to
interpret. Some more complex models such as neural networks may not even be
able to expose their learned feature importances. In such situations, it can be
useful to leverage black-box explainers, which attempt to explain a model’s
predictions independently of its inner workings.
Commonly, these explainers identify predictive features for a model on a given
data point instead of globally. They do this by changing each feature value for a
given example and observing how the model’s predictions change as a
consequence. LIME and SHAP are two popular black-box explainers.
For an end-to-end example of using these, see the black-box explainer notebook
in the book’s GitHub repository.
Figure 5-12 shows an explanation provided by LIME around which words were
most important in deciding to classify this example question as high quality.
LIME generated these explanations by repeatedly removing words from the
input question and seeing which words make our model lean more towards one
class or another.




                      Figure 5-12. Explaining one particular example

We can see that the model correctly predicted that the question would receive a
high score. However, the model was not confident, outputting only a 52%
probability. The right side of Figure 5-12 shows the most impactful words for the
prediction. These words do not seem like they should be particularly relevant to
a question being of high quality, so let’s examine more examples to see if the
model leverages more useful patterns.
To get a quick sense of trends, we can use LIME on a larger sample of questions.
Running LIME on each question and aggregating the results can give us an idea
of which word our model finds predictive overall to make its decisions.
In Figure 5-13 we plot the most important predictions across 500 questions in
our dataset. We can see the trend of our model leveraging common words is
apparent in this larger sample as well. It seems that the model is having a hard
time generalizing beyond leveraging frequent words. The bag of words features
representing rare words most often have a value of zero. To improve on this, we
could either gather a larger dataset to expose our models to a more varied
vocabulary, or create features that will be less sparse.
                         Figure 5-13. Explaining multiple examples

You’ll often be surprised by the predictors your model ends up using. If any
features are more predictive for the model than you’d expect, try to find
examples containing these features in your training data and examine them. Use
this opportunity to double check how you split your dataset and watch for data
leakage.
When building a model to automatically classify emails into different topics
based on their content, for example, an ML Engineer I was mentoring once
found that the best predictor was a three-letter code at the top of the email. It
turns out this was an internal code to the dataset that mapped almost perfectly to
the labels. The model was entirely ignoring the content of the email, and
memorizing a pre-existing label. This was a clear example of data leakage,
which was only caught by looking at feature importance.


Conclusion
We started this chapter by covering criteria to decide on an initial model based
on all we’ve learned so far. Then, we covered the importance of splitting data
into multiple sets, and methods to avoid data leakage.
After training an initial model, we took a deep dive into ways to judge how well
it is performing by finding different ways to compare and contrast its predictions
to the data. Finally, we went on to inspect the model itself by displaying feature
importances and using a black-box explainer to gain an intuition for the feature it
uses to make predictions.
By now, you should have some intuition about improvements you could make to
your modeling. This takes us to the topic of Chapter 6 where we will take a
deeper dive on methods to tackle the problems we’ve surfaced here, by
debugging and troubleshooting an ML pipeline.
Chapter 6. Debug Your ML
Problems

In the previous chapter, we trained and evaluated our first model.
Getting a pipeline to a satisfactory level of performance is hard and requires
multiple iterations. The goal of this chapter is to guide you through one such
iteration cycle. In this chapter, I will cover tools to debug modeling pipelines and
ways to write tests to make sure they stay working once we start changing them.
Software best practices encourage practitioners to regularly test, validate, and
inspect their code, especially for sensitive steps such as security or input parsing.
This should be no different for ML, where errors in a model can be much harder
to detect than in traditional software.
We will cover some tips that will help you make sure that your pipeline is robust
and that you can try it out without causing your entire system to fail, but first
let’s dig into software best practices!


Software Best Practices
For most ML projects, you will repeat the process of building a model, analyzing
its shortcomings, and addressing them multiple times. You are also likely to
change each part of your infrastructure more than once, so it is crucial to find
methods to increase iteration speed.
In ML just like with any other software project, you should follow time-tested
software best practices. Most of them can be applied to ML projects with no
modifications, such as building only what you need, often referred to as the
Keep It Stupid Simple (KISS) principle.
ML projects are iterative in nature and go through many different iterations of
data cleaning and feature generation algorithms, as well as model choices. Even
when following these best practices, two areas often end up slowing down
iteration speed: debugging and testing. Speeding up debugging and test writing
can have a significant impact on any projects but is even more crucial for ML
projects, where the stochastic nature of models often turns a simple error into a
days-long investigation.
Many resources exist to help you learn how to debug general programs, such as
the University of Chicago’s concise debugging guide. If, like most ML
practitioners, your language of choice is Python, I recommend looking through
the Python documentation for pdb, the standard library debugger.
More than most pieces of software, however, ML code can often execute
seemingly correctly but produce entirely absurd results. This means that while
these tools and tips apply as is to most ML code, they are not sufficient to
diagnose common problems. I illustrate this in Figure 6-1: while in most
software applications, having strong test coverage can give us a high level of
confidence that our application is functioning well, ML pipelines can pass many
tests but still give entirely incorrect results. An ML program doesn’t just have to
run—it should produce accurate predictive outputs.




             Figure 6-1. An ML pipeline can execute with no errors and still be wrong

Because ML presents an additional set of challenges when it comes to
debugging, let’s cover a few specific methods that help.

ML-Specific Best Practices
When it comes to ML more than any type of software, merely having a program
execute end-to-end is not sufficient to be convinced of its correctness. An entire
pipeline can run with no errors and produce an entirely useless model.
Let’s say your program loads data and passes it to a model. Your model takes in
these inputs and optimizes the model’s parameters based on a learning algorithm.
Finally, your trained model produces outputs from a different set of data. Your
program has run without any visible bugs. The problem is that just by having
your program run, you have no guarantee at all that your model’s predictions are
correct.
Most models simply take a numerical input of a given shape (say a matrix
representing an image) and output data of a different shape (a list of coordinates
of key points in the input image, for example). This means that most models will
still run even if a data processing step corrupted the data before passing it to the
model, as long as the data is still numeric and of a shape the model can take as
input.
If your modeling pipeline performs poorly, how can you know whether it is due
to the quality of a model or the presence of a bug earlier in the process?
The best way to tackle these problems in ML is to follow a progressive
approach. Start by validating the data flow, then the learning capacity, and finally
generalization and inference. Figure 6-2 shows an overview of the process we
will cover in this chapter.
                       Figure 6-2. The order in which to debug a pipeline

This chapter will take you through each of these three steps, explaining each one
in depth. It can be tempting to skip steps in this plan when faced with a
perplexing bug, but the vast majority of times I’ve found that following this
principled approach is the fastest way to identify and correct errors.
Let’s start by validating the data flow. The simplest way to do this is by taking a
very small subset of data and verifying that it can flow all the way through your
pipeline.


Debug Wiring: Visualizing and Testing
This first step is simple and will make life dramatically simpler once you adopt
it: start by making your pipelines work for a small subset of examples in your
dataset. This corresponds to the wiring step in Figure 6-2. Once you’ve made
sure your pipeline works for a few examples, you’ll be able to write tests to
make sure your pipeline keeps functioning as you make changes.

Start with One Example
The goal of this initial step is to verify that you are able to ingest data, transform
it in the right format, pass it to a model, and have the model output something
correct. At this stage, you aren’t judging whether your model can learn
something, just whether the pipeline can let data through.
Concretely this means:
         Selecting a few examples in your dataset
         Getting your model to output a prediction for these examples
         Getting your model to update its parameters to output the correct
         predictions for these examples

The first two items are focused on verifying that our model can ingest input data
and produce a reasonable-looking output. This initial output will most likely be
wrong from a modeling perspective but will allow us to check that the data is
flowing all the way through.
The last item aims to make sure our model has the ability to learn a mapping
from a given input to the associated output. Fitting a few data points will not
produce a useful model and will likely lead to overfitting. This process simply
allows us to validate that the model can update its parameters to fit a set of
inputs and outputs.
Here is how this first step would look in practice: if you are training a model to
predict whether Kickstarter campaigns will be successful, you may be planning
on training it on all campaigns from the last few years. Following this tip, you
should start by checking whether your model can output a prediction for two
campaigns. Then, use the label for these campaigns (whether they were
successful or not) to optimize the model’s parameters until it predicts the correct
outcome.
If we have chosen our model appropriately, it should have the capacity to learn
from our dataset. And if our model can learn from our entire dataset, it should
have the capacity to memorize a data point. The ability to learn from a few
examples is a necessary condition for a model to learn from an entire dataset. It
is also much easier to validate than the entire learning process, so starting with
one allows us to quickly narrow down any potential future problems.
The vast majority of errors that can come up at this initial stage relate to data
mismatch: the data you are loading and preprocessing is fed to your model in a
format that it cannot accept. Since most models accept only numerical values,
for example, they may fail when a given value is left empty and has a null value.
Some cases of mismatch can be more elusive and lead to silent failure. A
pipeline fed values that are not in the correct range or shape may still run but
would produce a poorly performing model. Models that require normalized data
will often still train on nonnormalized data: they simply will not be able to fit it
in a useful manner. Similarly, feeding a matrix of the wrong shape to a model
can cause it to misinterpret the input and produce incorrect outputs.
Catching such errors is harder, because they will manifest later in the process
once we evaluate the performance of a model. The best way to proactively detect
them is to visualize data as you build your pipeline and build tests to encode
assumptions. We will see how to do this next.

Visualization steps
As we’ve seen in previous chapters, while metrics are a crucial part of modeling
work, regularly inspecting and investigating our data is equally important.
Observing just a few examples to start makes it easier to notice changes or
inconsistencies.
The goal of this process is to inspect changes at regular intervals. If you think of
a data pipeline as an assembly line, you’d want to inspect the product after every
meaningful change. This means checking the value of your datapoint at every
line is probably too frequent, and looking only at the input and output values is
definitely not informative enough.
In Figure 6-3, I illustrate a few example inspection points you could use to take a
look at a data pipeline. In this example, we inspect the data at multiple steps,
starting with raw data all the way to model outputs.
                           Figure 6-3. Potential inspection points

Next, we’ll cover a few key steps that are often worth inspecting. We’ll start
with data loading and move on to cleaning, feature generation, formatting, and
model outputs.

Data loading
Whether you are loading your data from disk or through an API call, you will
want to verify that it is formatted correctly. This process is similar to the one you
go through when doing EDA but is done here within the context of the pipeline
you have built to verify that no error has led to the data becoming corrupted.
Does it contain all the fields you expect it to? Are any of these fields null or of
constant value? Do any of the values lie in a range that seems incorrect, such as
an age variable sometimes being negative? If you are working with text or
speech or images, do the examples match your expectations of what they would
look, sound, or read like?
Most of our processing steps rely on assumptions we make about the structure of
our input data, so it is crucial to validate this aspect.
Because the goal here is to identify inconsistencies between our expectation of
the data and reality, you may want to visualize more than one or two data points.
Visualizing a representative sample will assure we do not only observe a “lucky”
example and wrongly assume all data points are of the same quality.
Figure 6-4 shows an example for our case study from the dataset exploration
notebook in this book’s GitHub repository. Here, hundreds of posts in our
archive are of an undocumented post type and thus need to be filtered out. In the
figure, you can see rows with a PostTypeId of 5, which is not referenced in the
dataset documentation and that we thus remove from the training data.




                         Figure 6-4. Visualizing a few rows of data

Once you’ve verified that the data conforms to expectations laid out in the
dataset documentation, it is time to start processing it for modeling purposes.
This starts with data cleaning.

Cleaning and feature selection
The next step in most pipelines is to remove any unnecessary information. This
can include fields or values that are not going to be used by the model but also
any fields that may contain information about our label that our model would not
have access to in production (see “Split Your Dataset”).
Remember that each feature you remove is a potential predictor for your model.
The task of deciding which features to keep and which features to remove is
called feature selection and is an integral part of iterating on models.
You should verify that no crucial information is lost, that all unneeded values are
removed, and that you have not left any extra information in our dataset that will
artificially boost our model’s performance by leaking information (see “Data
leakage”).
Once the data is cleaned, you’ll want to generate some features for your model
to use.
Feature generation
When generating a new feature, such as adding the frequency of references to a
product name in the description of a kickstarter campaign, for example, it is
important to inspect its values. You need to check that the feature values are
populated and that the values seem reasonable. This is a challenging task, as it
requires not only identifying all features but estimating reasonable values for
each of these features.
At this point, you do not need to analyze it any deeper, as this step is focusing on
validating assumptions about data flowing through the model, not the usefulness
of the data or the model yet.
Once features have been generated, you should make sure they can be passed to
the model in a format it can understand.

Data formatting
As we’ve discussed in earlier chapters, before passing data points to a model,
you will need to transform them to a format it can understand. This can include
normalizing input values, vectorizing text by representing it in a numerical
fashion, or formatting a black and white video as a 3D tensor (see
“Vectorizing”).
If you are working on a supervised problem, you’ll use a label in addition to the
input, such as class names in classification, or a segmentation map in image
segmentation. These will also need to be transformed to a model-understandable
format.
In my experience working on multiple image segmentation problems, for
example, data mismatch between labels and model predictions is one of the most
common causes of errors. Segmentation models use segmentation masks as
labels. These masks are the same size as the input image, but instead of pixel
values, they contain class labels for each pixel. Unfortunately, different libraries
use different conventions to represent these masks, so the labels often end up in
the wrong format, preventing the model from learning.
I’ve illustrated this common pitfall in Figure 6-5. Let’s say a model expects
segmentation masks to be passed with a value of 255 for pixels that are of a
certain class, and 0 otherwise. If a user instead assumes that pixels contained
within the mask should have a value of 1 instead of 255, they may pass their
labeled masks in the format seen in “provided.” This would lead the mask to be
considered as almost entirely empty, and the model would output inaccurate
predictions.




              Figure 6-5. Poorly formatted labels will prevent a model from learning

Similarly, classification labels are often represented as a list of zeros with a
single one at the index of the true class. A simple off-by-one error can lead to
labels being shifted and a model learning to always predict the shifted-by-one
label. This kind of error can be hard to troubleshoot if you do not take the time to
look at your data.
Because ML models will manage to fit to most numerical outputs regardless of
whether they have an accurate structure or content, this stage is where many
tricky bugs occur and where this method is useful to find them.
Here is an example of what such a formatting function looks like for our case
study. I generate a vectorized representation of our question text. Then, I append
additional features to this representation. Since the function consists of multiple
transformations and vector operations, visualizing the return value of this
function will allow me to verify that it does format data the way we intend it to.

  def get_feature_vector_and_label(df, feature_names):
      """
      Generate input and output vectors using the vectors feature and
       the given feature names
      :param df: input DataFrame
      :param feature_names: names of feature columns (other than vectors)
      :return: feature array and label array
      """
      vec_features = vstack(df["vectors"])
      num_features = df[feature_names].astype(float)
      features = hstack([vec_features, num_features])
      labels = df["Score"] > df["Score"].median()
      return features, labels

  features = [
      "action_verb_full",
      "question_mark_full",
      "text_len",
      "language_question",
  ]

  X_train, y_train = get_feature_vector_and_label(train_df, features)


When working with text data especially, there are usually multiple steps
involved before data is properly formatted for a model. Going from a string of
text to a tokenized list to a vectorized representation including potential
additional features is an error-prone process. Even inspecting the shape of the
objects at each step can help catch many simple mistakes.
Once the data is in the appropriate format, you can pass it to a model. The last
step is to visualize and validate the model’s outputs.

Model output
At first, looking at outputs helps us see whether our model’s predictions are the
right type or shape (if we are predicting house price and duration on market, is
our model outputting an array of two numbers?).
In addition, when fitting a model to only a couple data points, we should see its
outputs start matching the true label. If the model doesn’t fit the data points, this
may be an indication of the data being incorrectly formatted or becoming
corrupted.
If the output of the model does not change at all during training, this may mean
that our model is actually not leveraging the input data. In such a case, I
recommend referring to “Stand on the Shoulders of Giants” to validate that the
model is being used correctly.
Once we’ve gone through the entire pipeline for a few examples, it is time to
write a few tests to automate some of this visualization work.

Systematizing our visual validation
Going through the visualization work described earlier helps catch a significant
amount of bugs and is a good time investment for every novel pipeline.
Validating assumptions about how data is flowing through the model helps save
a significant amount of time down the line, which can now be spent focusing on
training and generalization.
Pipelines change often, however. As you update different aspects iteratively to
improve your model and modify some of the processing logic, how can you
guarantee that everything is still working as intended? Going through the
pipeline and visualizing an example at all steps each time you make any change
would quickly get tiring.
This is where the software engineering best practices we talked about earlier
come into play. It is time to isolate each part of this pipeline, and encode our
observations into tests that we will be able to run as our pipeline changes, to
validate it.

Separate your concerns
Just like regular software, ML benefits greatly from a modular organization. To
make current and future debugging easier, separate each function so that you can
check that it individually works before looking at the broader pipeline.
Once a pipeline is broken down into individual functions, you’ll be able to write
tests for them.

Test Your ML Code
Testing a model’s behavior is hard. The majority of code in an ML pipeline is not
about the training pipeline or the model itself, however. If you look back to our
pipeline example in “Start with a Simple Pipeline”, most functions behave in a
deterministic way and can be tested.
In my experience, helping engineers and data scientists debug their models, I’ve
learned that the vast majority of errors come from the way data is acquired,
processed, or fed to the model. Testing data processing logic is thus crucial in
order to build a successful ML product.
For even more information about potential tests of an ML system, I recommend
the paper by E. Breck et al., “The ML Test Score: A Rubric for ML Production
Readiness and Technical Debt Reduction”, which contains many more examples
and lessons learned from deploying such systems at Google.
In this next section, we will describe useful tests to write for three key areas. In
Figure 6-6, you can see each of these areas, along with a few examples of tests
that we will describe next.




                            Figure 6-6. The three key areas to test

Pipelines start by ingesting data, so we’ll want to test that part first.

Test data ingestion
Data usually lives serialized on a disk or in a database. When moving data from
storage to our pipeline, we should make sure to verify the integrity and
correctness of the data. We can start by writing tests that verify that the data
points we load possess every feature we’ll need.
The following are three tests validating that our parser returns the right type (a
dataframe), that all important columns are defined, and that features are not all
null. You can find the tests we’ll cover in this chapter (and additional ones) in
the tests folder on this book’s GitHub repository.

  def test_parser_returns_dataframe():
      """
      Tests that our parser runs and returns a DataFrame
      """
      df = get_fixture_df()
      assert isinstance(df, pd.DataFrame)


  def test_feature_columns_exist():
      """
      Validate that all required columns are present
      """
      df = get_fixture_df()
      for col in REQUIRED_COLUMNS:
          assert col in df.columns


  def test_features_not_all_null():
      """
      Validate that no features are missing every value
      """
      df = get_fixture_df()
      for col in REQUIRED_COLUMNS:
          assert not df[col].isnull().all()


We can also test each feature for its type and validate that it is not null. Finally,
we can encode assumptions we have about the distribution and ranges of these
values by testing their average, minimum, and maximum values. Recently,
libraries such as Great Expectations have emerged to test the distributions of
features directly.
Here, you can see how you could write a simple mean test:

  ACCEPTABLE_TEXT_LENGTH_MEANS = pd.Interval(left=20, right=2000)

  def test_text_mean():
      """
      Validate that text mean matches with exploration expectations
      """
      df = get_fixture_df()
      df["text_len"] = df["body_text"].str.len()
      text_col_mean = df["text_len"].mean()
      assert text_col_mean in ACCEPTABLE_TEXT_LENGTH_MEANS


These tests allow us to verify that no matter which changes are made on the
storage side or with the API of our data source, we can know that our model has
access to the same kind of data it was first trained on. Once we’re confident as to
the consistency of the data we ingest, let’s look at the next step in the pipeline,
data processing.

Test data processing
After testing that the data that makes it to the beginning of our pipeline conforms
to our expectations, we should test that our cleaning and feature generation steps
do what we expect. We can start by writing tests for the preprocessing function
we have, verifying that it does indeed do what we intend it to. Also, we can write
similar tests to the data ingestion ones and focus on guaranteeing that our
assumptions about the state of the data going into our model are valid.
This means testing for the presence, type, and characteristics of the data points
after our processing pipeline. The following are examples of tests for the
presence of generated features, their type, and minimum, maximum, and mean
values:

  def test_feature_presence(df_with_features):
      for feat in REQUIRED_FEATURES:
          assert feat in df_with_features.columns

  def test_feature_type(df_with_features):
      assert df_with_features["is_question"].dtype == bool
      assert df_with_features["action_verb_full"].dtype == bool
      assert df_with_features["language_question"].dtype == bool
      assert df_with_features["question_mark_full"].dtype == bool
      assert df_with_features["norm_text_len"].dtype == float
      assert df_with_features["vectors"].dtype == list

    def test_normalized_text_length(df_with_features):
      normalized_mean = df_with_features["norm_text_len"].mean()
      normalized_max = df_with_features["norm_text_len"].max()
      normalized_min = df_with_features["norm_text_len"].min()
      assert normalized_mean in pd.Interval(left=-1, right=1)
      assert normalized_max in pd.Interval(left=-1, right=1)
      assert normalized_min in pd.Interval(left=-1, right=1)


These tests allow us to notice any changes to our pipelines that impact the input
to our model without having to write any additional tests. We will only need to
write new tests when we add new features or change the input to our model.
We can now feel confident both in the data we ingest and in the transformations
we apply to it, so it is time to test the next part of the pipeline, the model.

Test model outputs
Similarly to the two previous categories, we will write tests to validate that the
values the model outputs have the correct dimensions and ranges. We will also
test predictions for specific inputs. This helps proactively detect regressions in
prediction quality in new models and guarantee that any model we use always
produces the expected output on these example inputs. When a new model
shows better aggregate performance, it can be hard to notice whether its
performance worsened on specific types of inputs. Writing such tests helps
detect such issues more easily.
In the following examples, I start by testing the shape of the predictions of our
model, as well as their values. The third test aims to prevent regressions by
guaranteeing that the model classifies a specific poorly worded input question as
low quality.

  def test_model_prediction_dimensions(
      df_with_features, trained_v1_vectorizer, trained_v1_model
  ):
      df_with_features["vectors"] = get_vectorized_series(
          df_with_features["full_text"].copy(), trained_v1_vectorizer
      )

      features, labels = get_feature_vector_and_label(
          df_with_features, FEATURE_NAMES
      )

      probas = trained_v1_model.predict_proba(features)
      # the model makes one prediction per input example
      assert probas.shape[0] == features.shape[0]
      # the model predicts probabilities for two classes
      assert probas.shape[1] == 2


  def test_model_proba_values(
      df_with_features, trained_v1_vectorizer, trained_v1_model
  ):
      df_with_features["vectors"] = get_vectorized_series(
          df_with_features["full_text"].copy(), trained_v1_vectorizer
      )

      features, labels = get_feature_vector_and_label(
          df_with_features, FEATURE_NAMES
      )

      probas = trained_v1_model.predict_proba(features)
      # the model's probabilities are between 0 and 1
      assert (probas >= 0).all() and (probas <= 1).all()


  def test_model_predicts_no_on_bad_question():
      input_text = "This isn't even a question. We should score it poorly"
      is_question_good = get_model_predictions_for_input_texts([input_text])
      # The model classifies the question as poor
      assert not is_question_good[0]


We first visually inspected the data to verify it remained useful and usable
throughout our pipeline. Then, we wrote tests to guarantee these assumptions
remain correct as our processing strategy evolves. It is now time to tackle the
second part of Figure 6-2, debugging the training procedure.


Debug Training: Make Your Model Learn
Once you’ve tested your pipeline and validated that it works for one example,
you know a few things. Your pipeline takes in data and successfully transforms
it. It then passes this data to a model in the right format. Finally, the model can
take a few data points and learn from them, outputting the correct results.
It is now time to see whether your model can work on more than a few data
points and learn from your training set. The focus of this next section is on being
able to train your model on many examples and have it fit to all of your training
data.
To do so, you can now pass your entire training set to your model and measure
its performance. Alternatively, if you have a large amount of data, you can
instead gradually increase the quantity of data you feed to your model while
keeping an eye on aggregate performance.
One advantage of progressively increasing the size of your training dataset is
that you’ll be able to measure the effect of additional data on the performance of
your model. Start with a few hundred examples, and then move to a few
thousand, before passing in your whole dataset (if your dataset is smaller than a
thousand examples, feel free to skip straight to using it in its entirety).
At each step, fit your model on the data and evaluate its performance on the
same data. If your model has the capacity to learn from the data you are using,
its performance on the training data should stay relatively stable.
To contextualize model performance, I recommend generating an estimate of
what an acceptable error level for your task is by labeling a few examples
yourself, for example, and comparing your predictions to the true label. Most
tasks also come with an irreducible error, representing the best performance
given the complexity of the task. See Figure 6-7 for an illustration of usual
training performance compared to such metrics.
A model’s performance on the whole dataset should be worse than when using
only one example, since memorizing an entire training set is harder than a single
example, but should still remain within the boundaries defined earlier.
If you are able to feed your entire training set and the performance of your
model reaches the requirement you defined when looking at your product goal,
feel free to move on to the next section! If not, I’ve outlined a couple common
reasons a model can struggle on a training set in the next section.




                  Figure 6-7. Training accuracy as a function of dataset size


Task Difficulty
If a model’s performance is drastically lower than expected, the task may be too
difficult. To evaluate how hard a task is, consider:
        The quantity and diversity of data you have
         How predictive the features you have generated are
         The complexity of your model
Let’s look at each of those in a little more detail.

Data quality, quantity, and diversity
The more diverse and complex your problem is, the more data you will need for
a model to learn from it. For your model to learn patterns, you should aim to
have many examples of each type of data you have. If you are classifying
pictures of cats as one of a hundred possible breeds, for example, you’d need
many more pictures than if you were simply trying to tell cats apart from dogs.
In fact, the quantity of data you need often scales exponentially with the number
of classes, as having more classes means more opportunities for
misclassification.
In addition, the less data you have, the more impact any errors in your labels or
any missing values have. This is why it is worth spending the time to inspect and
verify features and labels of your dataset.
Finally, most datasets contain outliers, data points that are radically different
from others and very hard for a model to handle. Removing outliers from your
training set can often improve the performance of a model by simplifying the
task at hand, but it is not always the right approach: if you believe that your
model may encounter similar data points in production, you should keep outliers
and focus on improving your data and model so that the model can successfully
fit to them.
The more complex a dataset is, the more helpful it can be to work on ways to
represent your data that will make it easier for a model to learn from it. Let’s
look at what this means.

Data representation
How easy is it to detect the patterns you care about using only the representation
you give your model? If a model is struggling to perform well on training data,
you should add features that make the data more expressive and thus help the
model learn better.
This can consist of novel features we had previously decided to ignore but that
may be predictive. In our ML Editor example, a first iteration of the model only
took into account the text in the body of a question. After exploring the dataset
further, I noticed that question titles are often very informative as to whether a
question is good or not. Incorporating that feature back into the dataset allowed
the model to perform better.
New features can often be generated by iterating on existing ones or combining
them in a creative manner. We saw an example of this in “Let Data Inform
Features and Models”, when we looked at ways to combine the day of the week
and day of the month to generate a feature that was relevant to a particular
business case.
In some cases, the problem lies with your model. Let’s look at these cases next.

Model capacity
Increasing data quality and improving features often provides the largest
benefits. When a model is the cause for poor performance, it can often mean that
it is not adequate to the task at hand. As we saw in “From Patterns to Models”,
specific datasets and problems call for specific models. A model that is not
appropriate for a task will struggle to perform on it, even if it was able to overfit
a few examples.
If a model struggles on a dataset that seems to have many predictive features,
start by asking yourself whether you are using the right type of model. If
possible, use a simpler version of the given model to more easily inspect it. For
example, if a random forest model isn’t performing at all, try a decision tree on
the same task and visualize its splits to examine whether they use the features
you thought would be predictive.
On the other hand, the model you are using may be too simple. Starting with the
simplest model is good to quickly iterate, but some tasks are entirely out of reach
of some models. To tackle them, you may need to add complexity to your model.
To verify that a model is indeed adapted to a task, I recommend looking at prior
art as we described in “Stand on the Shoulders of Giants”. Find examples of
similar tasks, and examine which models were used to tackle them. Using one of
those models should be a good starting point.
If the model seems appropriate for the task, its lackluster performance could be
due to the training procedure.

Optimization Problems
Starting by validating that a model can fit a small set of examples makes us
confident that data can flow back and forth. We do not know, however, whether
our training procedure can adequately fit a model to the entire dataset. The
method that our model is using to update its weights may be inadequate for our
current dataset. Such problems often occur in more complex models such as
neural networks, where hyperparameter choice can have a significant impact on
training performance.
When dealing with models that are fit using gradient descent techniques such as
neural networks, using visualization tools such as TensorBoard can help surface
training problems. When plotting the loss during your optimization process, you
should see it decline steeply initially and then gradually. In Figure 6-8, you can
see an example of a TensorBoard dashboard depicting a loss function (cross-
entropy in this case) as training progresses.
Such a curve can show that the loss is decreasing very slowly, indicating that a
model may be learning too slowly. In such a case, you could increase the
learning rate and plot the same curve to see whether the loss decreases faster. If a
loss curve looks very unstable, on the other hand, it may be due to the learning
rate being too large.
        Figure 6-8. TensorBoard dashboard screenshot from the TensorBoard documentation

In addition to the loss, visualizing weight values and activations can help you
identify if a network is not learning properly. In Figure 6-9, you can see a change
in the distribution of the weights as training progresses. If you see the
distributions remain stable for a few epochs, it may be a sign that you should
increase the learning rate. If they vary too much, lower it instead.
                 Figure 6-9. Weight histograms changing as training progresses

Successfully fitting a model to the training data is an important milestone in an
ML project, but it is not the last step. The end goal of building an ML product is
to build a model that can perform well on examples it has never seen before. To
do this, we need a model that can generalize well to unseen examples, so I’ll
cover generalization next.


Debug Generalization: Make Your Model Useful
Generalization is the third and final part of Figure 6-2 and focuses on getting an
ML model to work well on data it has not seen before. In “Split Your Dataset”,
we saw the importance of creating separate training, validation, and test splits to
evaluate a model’s ability to generalize to unseen examples. In “Evaluate Your
Model: Look Beyond Accuracy”, we covered methods to analyze the
performance of a model and identify potential additional features to help
improve it. Here, we’ll cover some recommendations when a model still fails to
perform on the validation set after multiple iterations.
Data Leakage
We covered data leakage in more detail in “Data leakage”, but I want to mention
it here within the context of generalization. A model will often initially perform
worse on the validation set than the training set. This is to be expected since it is
harder to make predictions on data that a model has not been exposed to before
than on data it was trained to fit.


                                                NOTE
     When looking at validation loss and training loss during training before it is complete,
     validation performance may appear better than training performance. This is because the
     training loss accumulates over the epoch as the model is trained, while the validation loss is
     calculated after the epoch has completed, using the latest version of the model.



If validation performance is better than training performance, it can sometimes
be due to data leakage. If examples in the training data contain information about
others in the validation data, a model will be able to leverage this information
and perform well on the validation set. If you are surprised by validation
performance, inspect the features a model uses and see if they show data
leakage. Fixing such a leakage issue will lead to a lower validation performance,
but a better model.
Data leakage can lead us to believe that a model is generalizing when it really
isn’t. In other cases, it is clear from looking at performance on a held-out
validation set that the model performs well only on training. In those kinds of
cases, the model may be overfitting.

Overfitting
In “Bias variance trade-off”, we saw that when a model is struggling to fit the
training data, we say the model is underfitting. We also saw that the opposite of
underfitting is overfitting, and this is when our model fits our training data too
well.
What does fitting data too well mean? It means that instead of learning
generalizable trends that correlate with good or poor writing, for example, a
model may pick up on specific patterns present in individual examples in a
training set that are not present in different data. Those patterns help it get a high
score on the training set but aren’t useful to classify other examples.
Figure 6-10 shows a practical example of overfitting and underfitting for a toy
dataset. The overfit model fits the training data perfectly but doesn’t accurately
approximate the underlying trend; thus, it fails to accurately predict unseen
points. The underfit model does not capture the trend of the data at all. The
model labeled reasonable fit performs worse on the training data than the overfit
model but better on unseen data.




                         Figure 6-10. Overfitting versus underfitting

When a model performs drastically better on the training set than on the test set,
that usually means that it is overfit. It has learned the specific details of the
training data but is not able to perform on unseen data.
Since overfitting is due to a model learning too much about training data, we can
prevent it by reducing the ability of a model to learn from a dataset. There are a
few ways to do that, which we’ll cover here.

Regularization
Regularization adds a penalty on a model’s capacity to represent information.
Regularizing aims to limit the ability of a model to focus on many irrelevant
patterns and encourages it to pick fewer, more predictive features.
A common way to regularize a model is to impose a penalty on the absolute
value of its weights. For models such as linear and logistic regression, for
example, L1 and L2 regularization add an additional term to the loss function
that penalizes large weights. In the case of L1, this term is the sum of the
absolute value of weights. For L2, it is the sum of the squared values of weight.
Different regularization methods have different effects. L1 regularization can
help select informative features by setting uninformative ones to zero (read more
on the “Lasso (statistics)” Wikipedia page). L1 regularization is also useful when
some features are correlated by encouraging the model to leverage only one of
them.
Regularization methods can also be model specific. Neural networks often use
dropout as a regularization method. Dropout randomly ignores some proportion
of neurons in a network during training. This prevents a single neuron from
becoming excessively influential, which could enable the network to memorize
aspects of training data.
For tree-based models such as random forests, reducing the maximum depth of
trees reduces the ability of each tree to overfit to the data and thus helps
regularize the forest. Increasing the number of trees used in a forest also
regularizes it.
Another way to prevent a model from overfitting to training data is to make the
data itself harder to overfit to. We can do this through a process called data
augmentation.

Data augmentation
Data augmentation is the process of creating new training data by slightly
altering existing data points. The goal is to artificially produce data points that
are different from existing ones in order to expose a model to a more varied type
of input. Augmentation strategies depend on the type of data. In Figure 6-11, you
can see a few potential augmentations for images.
                  Figure 6-11. A few examples of data augmentation for images

Data augmentation makes a training set less homogeneous and thus more
complex. This makes fitting the training data harder but exposes a model to a
wider range of inputs during training. Data augmentation often leads to lower
performance on the training set but higher performance on unseen data such as a
validation set and examples in production. This strategy is especially effective if
we can use augmentation to make our training set more similar to examples in
the wild.
I once helped an engineer use satellite imagery to detect flooded roads after a
hurricane. The project was challenging, since he only had access to labeled data
for non-flooded cities. To help improve his model’s performance on hurricane
imagery, which is significantly darker and lower quality, they built augmentation
pipelines that made training images look darker and blurrier. This lowered
training performance since the roads were now harder to detect. On the other
hand, it increased the model’s performance on the validation set because the
augmentation process exposed the model to images that were more similar to the
ones it would encounter in the validation set. Data augmentation helped make
the training set more representative and thus made the model more robust.
If after using the methods described earlier a model still performs poorly on a
validation set, you should iterate on the dataset itself.

Dataset redesign
In some cases, a difficult training/validation split can lead to a model
underfitting and struggling on the validation set. If a model is exposed to only
easy examples in its training set and only challenging ones in its validation set, it
will be unable to learn from difficult data points. Similarly, some categories of
examples may be underrepresented in the training set, preventing a model ever
from learning from them. If a model is trained to minimize an aggregate metric,
it risks fitting mostly the majority of classes, ignoring minority ones.
While augmentation strategies can help, redesigning a training split to make it
more representative is often the best path forward. When doing this, we should
carefully control for data leakage and make the splits as balanced as possible in
terms of difficulty. If the new data split allocates all the easy examples to the
validation set, the model’s performance on the validation set will be artificially
high, but it will not translate to results in production. To alleviate concerns that
data splits may be of unequal quality, we can use k-fold cross-validation, where
we perform k successive different splits, and measure the performance of the
model on each split.
Once we’ve balanced our training and validation set to make sure that they are of
similar complexity, our model’s performance should improve. If the performance
is still not satisfactory, we may be simply tackling a really hard problem.

Consider the Task at Hand
A model can struggle to generalize because the task is too complex. The input
we are using may not be predictive of the target, for example. To make sure the
task you are tackling is of appropriate difficulty for the current state of ML, I
suggest referring once more to “Stand on the Shoulders of Giants”, where I
described how to explore and evaluate the current state of the art.
In addition, having a dataset does not mean that a task is solvable. Consider the
impossible task of accurately predicting random outputs from random inputs.
You could build a model that performs well on a training set by memorizing it,
but this model would not be able to accurately predict other random outputs
from random inputs.
If your models aren’t generalizing, your task may be too hard. There may not be
enough information in your training examples to learn meaningful features that
will be informative for future data points. If that is the case, then the problem
you have is not well suited for ML, and I would invite you to revisit Chapter 1 to
find a better framing.


Conclusion
In this chapter, we covered the three successive steps you should follow to get a
model to work. First, debug the wiring of your pipeline by inspecting the data
and writing tests. Then, get a model to perform well on a training test to validate
that it has the capacity to learn. Finally, verify that it is able to generalize and
produce useful outputs on unseen data.
This process will help you debug models, build them faster, and make them
more robust. Once you have built, trained, and debugged your first model, the
next step is to judge its performance and either iterate on it or deploy it.
In Chapter 7, we will cover how to use a trained classifier to provide actionable
recommendations for users. We will then compare candidate models for the ML
Editor and decide which one should be used to power these recommendations.
Chapter 7. Using Classifiers for
Writing Recommendations

The best way to make progress in ML is through repeatedly following the
iterative loop depicted in Figure 7-1, which we saw in the introduction to Part
III. Start by establishing a modeling hypothesis, iterate on a modeling pipeline,
and perform detailed error analysis to inform your next hypothesis.




                                Figure 7-1. The ML loop

The previous chapters described multiple steps in this loop. In Chapter 5, we
covered how to train and score a model. In Chapter 6, we shared advice on how
to build models faster and troubleshoot ML-related errors. This chapter closes an
iteration of the loop by first showcasing methods to use trained classifiers to
provide suggestions to users, then selecting a model to use for the ML Editor,
and finally combining both to build a working ML Editor.
In “ML Editor Planning” we outlined our plan for the ML Editor, which consists
of training a model that classifies questions into high- and low-score categories
and use this trained model to guide users to write better questions. Let’s see how
we can use such a model to provide writing advice to users.


Extracting Recommendations from Models
The goal of the ML Editor is to provide writing recommendations. Classifying a
question as good or bad is a first step in this direction since it makes it possible
to display the current quality of a question to a user. We’d like to go one step
beyond this and help users improve the formulation of their questions by
providing them with actionable recommendations.
This section covers methods to provide such recommendations. We will start
with simple approaches that rely on aggregate feature metrics and do not require
the use of a model at inference time. Then, we will see how to both use a
model’s score and its sensitivity to perturbations to generate more personalized
recommendations. You can find examples of each of the methods showcased in
this chapter applied to the ML Editor in the generating recommendations
notebook on this book’s GitHub site.

What Can We Achieve Without a Model?
Training a model that performs well is achieved through multiple iterations of
the ML loop. Each iteration helps create a better set of features through
researching prior art, iterating on potential datasets, and examining model
results. To provide users with recommendations, you can leverage this feature
iteration work. This approach does not necessarily require running a model on
each question a user submits and focuses instead on making general
recommendations.
You can do so either by using the features directly or by incorporating a trained
model to help select relevant ones.

Using feature statistics
Once predictive features have been identified, they can be directly
communicated to a user without using a model. If the mean value of a feature is
significantly different for each class, you can share this information directly to
help users nudge their examples in the direction of the target class.
One of the features we identified early on for the ML Editor was the presence of
question marks. Inspecting the data showed that questions with high scores tend
to have fewer question marks. To use this information to generate
recommendations, we can write a rule that warns a user if the proportion of
question marks in their question is much larger than in highly rated questions.
Visualizing average feature values for each label can be done in a few lines of
code using pandas.

  class_feature_values = feats_labels.groupby("label").mean()
  class_feature_values = class_feature_values.round(3)
  class_feature_values.transpose()


Running the previous code produces the result shown in Table 7-1. In these
results, we can see that many of the features we’ve generated have significantly
different values for high- and low-score questions, labeled True and False here.

Table 7-1. Differences in
feature values between
classes
Label         False    True

num_questions 0.432    0.409

num_periods   0.814    0.754

num_commas    0.673    0.728

num_exclam    0.019    0.015

num_quotes    0.216    0.199

num_colon     0.094    0.081

num_stops     10.537   10.610

num_semicolon 0.013    0.014

num_words     21.638   21.480

num_chars     822.104 967.032
Using feature statistics is a simple way to provide robust recommendations. It is
in many ways similar to the heuristic approach that we first built in “The
Simplest Approach: Being the Algorithm”.
When comparing feature values between classes, it can be hard to identify which
features contribute the most to a question being classified a certain way. To
estimate this better, we can use feature importance.

Extracting Global Feature Importance
We first showed examples of generating feature importance in the context of
model evaluation in “Evaluate Feature Importance”. Feature importances can
also be used to prioritize feature-based recommendations. When displaying
recommendations to users, features that are most predictive for a trained
classifier should be prioritized.
Next, I’ve displayed the results of a feature importance analysis for a question
classification model that uses a total of 30 features. Each of the top features has a
much larger importance than the bottom features. Guiding users to act based on
these top features first will help them improve their questions faster according to
the model.

  Top 5 importances:

  num_chars: 0.053
  num_questions: 0.051
  num_periods: 0.051
  ADV: 0.049
  ADJ: 0.049

  Bottom 5 importances:

  X: 0.011
  num_semicolon: 0.0076
  num_exclam: 0.0072
  CONJ: 0
  SCONJ: 0


Combining feature statistics and feature importance can make recommendations
more actionable and focused. The first approach provides target values for each
feature, while the latter prioritizes a smaller subset of the most important
features to display. These approaches also provide recommendations quickly,
since they do not require running a model at inference time, only checking an
input against feature statistics for the most important features.
As we saw in “Evaluate Feature Importance”, extracting feature importances can
be more difficult for complex models. If you are using a model that does not
expose feature importances, you can leverage a black-box explainer on a large
sample of examples to attempt to infer their values.
Feature importance and feature statistics come with another drawback, which is
that they do not always provide accurate recommendations. Since
recommendations are based on statistics aggregated over the entire dataset, they
will not be applicable to each individual example. Feature statistics only provide
general recommendations, such as “questions that contain more adverbs tend to
receive higher ratings.” However, there exists examples of questions with a
below average proportion of adverbs that receive a high score. Such
recommendations are not useful for these questions.
In the next two sections, we will cover methods to provide more granular
recommendations that work at the level of individual examples.

Using a Model’s Score
Chapter 5 described how classifiers output a score for each example. The
example is then assigned a class based on whether this score is above a certain
threshold. If a model’s score is well calibrated (see “Calibration Curve” for more
on calibration), then it can be used as an estimate of the probability of an input
example belonging to the given class.
To display a score instead of a class for a scikit-learn model, use the
predict_proba function and select the class for which you’d like to display a
score.

  # probabilities is an array containing one probability per class
  probabilities = clf.predict_proba(features)

  # Positive probas contains only the score of the positive class
  positive_probs = clf[:,1]


If it is well calibrated, presenting a score to users allows them to track
improvements in their question as they follow recommendations to modify it,
leading to it receiving a higher score. Quick feedback mechanisms like a score
help users have an increased sense of trust in the recommendations provided by
a model.
On top of a calibrated score, a trained model can also be used to provide
recommendations to improve a specific example.

Extracting Local Feature Importance
Recommendations can be generated for an individual example by using a black-
box explainer on top of a trained model. In “Evaluate Feature Importance”, we
saw how black-box explainers estimate the importance of feature values for a
specific example by repeatedly applying slight perturbations to input features
and observing changes in the model’s predicted score. This makes such
explainers a great tool to provide recommendations.
Let’s demonstrate this using the LIME package to generate explanations for an
example. In the following code example, we first instantiate a tabular explainer,
and then we choose an example to explain in our test data. We show the
explanations in the generating recommendations notebook on this book’s GitHub
repository, and display them in array format.

  from lime.lime_tabular import LimeTabularExplainer

  explainer = LimeTabularExplainer(
      train_df[features].values,
      feature_names=features,
      class_names=["low", "high"],
      discretize_continuous=True,
  )

  idx = 8
  exp = explainer.explain_instance(
      test_df[features].iloc[idx, :],
      clf.predict_proba,
      num_features=10,
      labels=(1,),
  )

  print(exp_array)
  exp.show_in_notebook(show_table=True, show_all=False)
  exp_array = exp.as_list()
Running the previous code produces the plot shown in Figure 7-2 as well as the
array of feature importances shown in the following code. The model’s predicted
probabilities are displayed on the left side of the figure. In the middle of the
figure, feature values are ranked by their contributions to the prediction.




                        Figure 7-2. Explanations as recommendations

Those values are identical to the ones in the more readable console output below.
Each row in this output represents a feature value and its impact on the score of
the model. For example, the fact that the feature num_diff_words had a value
lower than 88.00 lowered the score of the model by about .038. According to
this model, increasing the length of the input question beyond this number would
increase its quality.

  [('num_diff_words <= 88.00', -0.038175093133182826),
   ('num_questions > 0.57', 0.022220445063244717),
   ('num_periods <= 0.50', 0.018064270196074716),
   ('ADJ <= 0.01', -0.01753028452563776),
   ('408.00 < num_chars <= 655.00', -0.01573650444507041),
   ('num_commas <= 0.39', -0.015551364531963608),
   ('0.00 < PROPN <= 0.00', 0.011826217792851488),
   ('INTJ <= 0.00', 0.011302327527387477),
   ('CONJ <= 0.00', 0.0),
   ('SCONJ <= 0.00', 0.0)]


For more usage examples, please refer to the generating recommendations
notebook in the book’s GitHub repository.
Black-box explainers can generate accurate recommendations for an individual
model, but they do come with a drawback. These explainers generate estimates
by perturbing input features and running a model on each perturbed input, so
using them to generate recommendations is slower than the methods discussed.
For example, the default number of perturbations that LIME uses to evaluate
feature importance is 500. This makes this method two orders of magnitude
slower than methods that need to run a model only once and even slower than
ones that do not need to run a model at all. On my laptop, running LIME on an
example question takes a little over 2 seconds. Such a delay could prevent us
from serving recommendations to users as they are typing and require them to
submit questions manually instead.
Just like many ML models, the recommendation methods we’ve seen here
present a trade-off between accuracy and latency. The right recommendation for
a product depends on its requirements.
Every recommendation method we’ve covered relies on features that were
generated during model iteration, and some of them leverage the models that
were trained as well. In the next section, we’ll compare different model options
for the ML Editor and decide which one is the most appropriate for
recommendations.


Comparing Models
“Measuring Success” covered important metrics to judge the success of a
product. “Judge Performance” described methods to evaluate models. Such
methods can also be used to compare successive iterations of models and
features to identify top-performing ones.
In this section we will choose a subset of key metrics and use them to evaluate
three successive iterations of the ML Editor in terms of model performance and
usefulness of recommendations.
The goal of the ML Editor is to provide recommendations using the techniques
mentioned. To power such recommendations, a model should match the
following requirements. It should be well calibrated so that its predicted
probabilities represent a meaningful estimate of the quality of a question. As we
covered in “Measuring Success”, it should have high precision so that the
recommendations it makes are accurate. The features it uses should be
understandable to a user, since they will serve as the basis for recommendations.
Finally, it should be fast enough to allow us to use a black-box explainer to
provide recommendations.
Let’s describe a few successive modeling approaches for the ML Editor and
compare their performance. The code for these performance comparisons can be
found in the comparing models notebook in this book’s GitHub repository.

Version 1: The Report Card
In Chapter 3, we built a first version of the editor that was entirely based on
heuristics. This first version used hard-coded rules meant to encode readability
and displayed results to users in a structured format. Building this pipeline
allowed us to modify our approach and focus ML efforts on providing clearer
recommendations, rather than a set of measurements.
Since this initial prototype was built in order to develop an intuition for the
problem we were tackling, we won’t be comparing it to other models here.

Version 2: More Powerful, More Unclear
After building a heuristic-based version and exploring the Stack Overflow
dataset, we settled on an initial modeling approach. The simple model we trained
can be found in the simple model notebook in this book’s GitHub repository.
This model used a combination of features generated by vectorizing text using
the methods described in “Vectorizing” and manually created features that were
surfaced during data exploration. When first exploring the dataset, I noticed a
few patterns:
         Longer questions received higher scores.
         Questions that were specifically about use of the English language
         received lower scores.
         Questions that contained at least one question mark received higher
         scores.
I created features to encode these assumptions by counting the length of the text,
the presence of words such as punctuate and abbreviate, and the frequency of
question marks.
In addition to these features, I vectorized input questions using TF-IDF. Using a
simple vectorization scheme allows me to tie a model’s feature importances back
to individual words, which can allow for word-level recommendations using the
methods described earlier.
This first approach showed acceptable aggregate performance, with a precision
of 0.62. Its calibration, however, left much to be desired, as you can see in
Figure 7-3.




                            Figure 7-3. V2 model calibration

After inspecting this model’s feature importances, I realized the only predictive
manually created feature was question length. Other generated features had no
predictive power. Exploring the dataset once more revealed a few more features
that seemed predictive:
        A restrained usage of punctuation seemed to be predictive of high
        scores.
        Questions that were more emotionally charged seemed to receive a
        lower score.
        Questions that were descriptive and used more adjectives seemed to
        receive a higher score.
To encode these new hypotheses, I generated a new set of features. I created
counts for each possible punctuation element. I then created counts that for each
part-of-speech category, such as verb or adjective, measured how many words in
a question belonged to that category. Finally, I added a feature to encode the
emotional sentiment of a question. For more details about these features, refer to
the second model notebook in this book’s GitHub repository.
This updated version of the model performed slightly better in aggregate, with a
precision of 0.63. Its calibration did not improve upon the previous model.
Displaying the feature importances for this model revealed that this model
exclusively relies on the manually crafted features, revealing that these features
have some predictive power.
Having a model rely on such understandable features makes it easier to explain
recommendations to a user than when using vectorized word-level features. For
example, the most important word-level features for this model are the words are
and what. We can guess why these words may be correlated with question
quality, but recommending to a user that they should reduce or increase the
occurrence of arbitrary words in their question does not make for clear
recommendations.
To address this limitation of a vectorized representation and recognizing that the
manually crafted features were predictive, I attempted to build a simpler model
that does not use any vectorization features.

Version 3: Understandable Recommendations
The third model contains only the features described earlier (counts of
punctuation and parts of speech, question sentiment, and question length). The
model thus only uses 30 features, as opposed to more than 7,000 when using
vectorized representations. See the third model notebook in this book’s GitHub
repository for more details. Removing vectorized features and keeping manual
ones allows the ML Editor to only leverage features that are explainable to a
user. However, it may lead to a model performing more poorly.
In terms of aggregate performance, this model does perform worse than previous
ones with a precision of 0.597. However, it is significantly better calibrated than
previous models. In Figure 7-4, you can see that model 3 is well calibrated for
most probabilities, even ones above .7 that other models struggle with. The
histogram shows that this is due to this model predicting such probabilities more
often than other models as well.
Because of the increased range of scores it produces and the improved
calibration of scores, this model is the best choice when it comes to displaying a
score to guide users. When it comes to making clear recommendations, this
model is also the best choice since it only relies on explainable features. Finally,
because it relies on fewer features than other models, it is also the fastest to run.
                            Figure 7-4. Calibration comparison

Model 3 is the best choice for the ML Editor and is thus the model we should
deploy for an initial version. In the next section, we will briefly cover how to use
this model with the recommendation techniques to provide editing
recommendations to users.


Generating Editing Recommendations
The ML Editor can benefit from any of the four methods we described to
generate recommendations. In fact, all of these methods are showcased in the
generating recommendations notebook in the book’s GitHub repository. Because
the model we are using is fast, we will illustrate the most elaborate approach
here, using black-box explainers.
Let’s start by taking a look at the entire recommendation function that takes in a
question and provides editing advice based on a trained model. Here is what this
function looks like:

  def get_recommendation_and_prediction_from_text(input_text, num_feats=10):
      global clf, explainer
      feats = get_features_from_input_text(input_text)
      pos_score = clf.predict_proba([feats])[0][1]

      exp = explainer.explain_instance(
          feats, clf.predict_proba, num_features=num_feats, labels=(1,)
      )
      parsed_exps = parse_explanations(exp.as_list())
      recs = get_recommendation_string_from_parsed_exps(parsed_exps)
      return recs, pos_score


Calling this function on an example input and pretty printing its results produces
recommendations such as the following ones. We can then display these
recommendations to users to allow them to iterate on their question.

  >> recos, score = get_recommendation_and_prediction_from_text(example_question)
  >> print("%s score" % score)
  0.4 score
  >> print(*recos, sep="\n")
  Increase question length
  Increase vocabulary diversity
  Increase frequency of question marks
  No need to increase frequency of periods
  Decrease question length
  Decrease frequency of determiners
  Increase frequency of commas
  No need to decrease frequency of adverbs
  Increase frequency of coordinating conjunctions
  Increase frequency of subordinating conjunctions


Let’s break this function down. Starting with its signature, the function takes as
arguments an input string representing a question, as well as an optional
argument determining how many of the most important features to make
recommendations for. It returns recommendations, as well as a score
representing the current quality of the question.
Diving into the body of the question, the first line refers to two globally defined
variables, the trained model and an instance of a LIME explainer like the one we
defined in “Extracting Local Feature Importance”. The next two lines generate
features from the input text and pass these features to the classifier for it to
predict. Then, exp is defined by using LIME to generate explanations.
The last two function calls turn these explanations into human-readable
recommendations. Let’s see how by looking at the definitions of these functions,
starting with parse_explanations.

  def parse_explanations(exp_list):
      global FEATURE_DISPLAY_NAMES
      parsed_exps = []
      for feat_bound, impact in exp_list:
          conditions = feat_bound.split(" ")

          # We ignore doubly bounded conditions , e.g. 1 <= a < 3 because
          # they are harder to formulate as a recommendation
          if len(conditions) == 3:
              feat_name, order, threshold = conditions

              simple_order = simplify_order_sign(order)
              recommended_mod = get_recommended_modification(simple_order, impact)

              parsed_exps.append(
                  {
                      "feature": feat_name,
                      "feature_display_name": FEATURE_DISPLAY_NAMES[feat_name],
                      "order": simple_order,
                      "threshold": threshold,
                      "impact": impact,
                      "recommendation": recommended_mod,
                  }
              )
      return parsed_exps


This function is long, but it is accomplishing a relatively simple goal. It takes the
array of feature importances returned by LIME and produces a more structured
dictionary that can be used in recommendations. Here is an example of this
transformation:

  # exps is in the format of LIME explanations
  >> exps = [('num_chars <= 408.00', -0.03908691525058592),
   ('DET > 0.03', -0.014685507408497802)]

  >> parse_explanations(exps)

  [{'feature': 'num_chars',
    'feature_display_name': 'question length',
    'order': '<',
    'threshold': '408.00',
    'impact': -0.03908691525058592,
    'recommendation': 'Increase'},
   {'feature': 'DET',
    'feature_display_name': 'frequency of determiners',
    'order': '>',
    'threshold': '0.03',
    'impact': -0.014685507408497802,
    'recommendation': 'Decrease'}]


Notice that the function call converted the threshold value displayed by LIME to
a recommendation of whether a feature value should be increased or decreased.
This is done using the get_recommended_modification function displayed
here:

  def get_recommended_modification(simple_order, impact):
      bigger_than_threshold = simple_order == ">"
      has_positive_impact = impact > 0

      if bigger_than_threshold and has_positive_impact:
          return "No need to decrease"
      if not bigger_than_threshold and not has_positive_impact:
          return "Increase"
      if bigger_than_threshold and not has_positive_impact:
          return "Decrease"
      if not bigger_than_threshold and has_positive_impact:
          return "No need to increase"


Once the explanations are parsed to recommendations, all that is left is to display
them in an appropriate format. This is accomplished by the last function call in
get_recommendation_and_prediction_from_text, which is displayed here:

  def get_recommendation_string_from_parsed_exps(exp_list):
      recommendations = []
      for feature_exp in exp_list:
          recommendation = "%s %s" % (
              feature_exp["recommendation"],
              feature_exp["feature_display_name"],
          )
          recommendations.append(recommendation)
      return recommendations


If you’d like to experiment with this editor and iterate on it, feel free to refer to
the generating recommendations notebook in this book’s GitHub repository. At
the end of the notebook, I’ve included an example of using the model
recommendations to rephrase a question multiple times and increase its score.
I’m reproducing this example here to demonstrate how such recommendations
can be used to guide users’ editing questions.

  // First attempt at a question
  >> get_recommendation_and_prediction_from_text(
      """
  I want to learn how models are made
  """
  )

  0.39 score
  Increase question length
  Increase vocabulary diversity
  Increase frequency of question marks
  No need to increase frequency of periods
  No need to decrease frequency of stop words

  // Following the first three recommendations
  >> get_recommendation_and_prediction_from_text(
      """
  I'd like to learn about building machine learning products.
  Are there any good product focused resources?
  Would you be able to recommend educational books?
  """
  )

  0.48 score
  Increase question length
  Increase vocabulary diversity
  Increase frequency of adverbs
  No need to decrease frequency of question marks
  Increase frequency of commas

  // Following the recommendations once more
  >> get_recommendation_and_prediction_from_text(
      """
  I'd like to learn more about ML, specifically how to build ML products.
  When I attempt to build such products, I always face the same challenge:
  how do you go beyond a model?
  What are the best practices to use a model in a concrete application?
  Are there any good product focused resources?
  Would you be able to recommend educational books?
  """
  )
  0.53 score


Voilà, we now have a pipeline that can take in a question and provide actionable
recommendations to users. This pipeline is by no means perfect, but we now
have a working end-to-end ML-powered editor. If you’d like to try your hand at
improving it, I encourage you to interact with this current version and identify
failure modes to address. Interestingly, while models can always be iterated
upon, I would argue that the most promising aspect to improve for this editor
would be to generate new features that are even clearer to users.


Conclusion
In this chapter, we’ve covered different methods to generate suggestions from a
trained classification model. With these methods in mind, we compared different
modeling approaches for the ML Editor and chose the one that would optimize
our product goal of helping users ask better questions. We then built an end-to-
end pipeline for the ML Editor and used it to provide recommendations.
The model we settled on still has much room for improvement and can benefit
from more iteration cycles. If you’d like to practice using the concepts we
outlined in Part III, I encourage you to go through these cycles yourself. Overall,
every chapter in Part III represents one aspect of the ML iteration loop. To
progress on ML projects, repeatedly go through the steps outlined in this section
until you estimate that a model is ready to be deployed.
In Part IV, we will cover risks that come with deploying models, how to mitigate
them, and methods to monitor and react to model performance variability.
        Part IV. Deploy and Monitor

Once we have built a model and validated it, we would like to give users access
to it. There are many different methods to surface ML models. The simplest case
involves building a small API, but in order to guarantee that your models run
well for all of your users, you will need more.
See Figure IV-1 for an illustration of some of the systems we will cover in the
next few chapters and that usually accompany a model in production.




                      Figure IV-1. Typical production modeling pipeline

Production ML pipelines need to be able to detect data and model failures and
handle them with grace. Ideally, you should also aim to proactively predict any
failure and have a strategy to deploy updated models. If any of this sounds
challenging to you, worry not! This is what we will cover in Part IV.
Chapter 8
   Before deploying, we should always perform a final round of validation. The
   goal is to thoroughly examine potential abuse and negative uses of our
   models and do our best to anticipate and build safeguards around them.

Chapter 9
   We will cover different methods and platforms to deploy models and how
   you would go about choosing one versus the other.

Chapter 10
   In this chapter, we will learn how to build a robust production environment
   that can support models. This includes detecting and addressing model
   failure, optimizing model performance, and systematizing retraining.
Chapter 11
   In this final chapter, we will tackle the crucial step of monitoring. In
   particular, we will cover why we need to monitor models, the best ways to
   monitor models, and how we can couple our monitoring setup to our
   deployment strategy.
Chapter 8. Considerations When
Deploying Models

The previous chapters covered model training and generalization performance.
These are necessary steps to deploy a model, but they are not sufficient to
guarantee the success of an ML-powered product.
Deploying a model requires a deeper dive into failure modes that could impact
users. When building products that learn from data, here are a few questions you
should answer:

        How was the data you are using collected?
        What assumptions is your model making by learning from this dataset?
        Is this dataset representative enough to produce a useful model?
        How could the results of your work be misused?
        What is the intended use and scope of your model?

The field of data ethics aims to answer some of these questions, and the methods
used are constantly evolving. If you’d like to dive deeper, O’Reilly has a
comprehensive report on the subject, Ethics and Data Science, by Mike
Loukides et al.
In this chapter, we will discuss some concerns around data collection and usage
and the challenges involved with making sure models keep working well for
everyone. We will conclude the section with a practical interview covering tips
to translate model predictions to user feedback.
Let’s start by looking at data, first covering ownership concerns and then moving
on to bias.


Data Concerns
In this section, we will start by outlining tips to keep in mind when you store,
use, and generate data. We will start by covering data ownership and the
responsibilities that come with storing data. Then, we will discuss common
sources of bias in datasets and methods to take this bias into account when
building models. Finally, we’ll cover examples of the negative consequences of
such biases and why they are important to mitigate.

Data Ownership
Data ownership refers to the requirements associated with the collection and use
of data. Here are a few important aspects to consider with regard to data
ownership:

        Data collection: Are you legally authorized to collect and use the
        dataset you want to train your model on?
        Data usage and permission: Have you clearly explained to your users
        why you needed their data and how you wanted to use it, and did they
        agree?
        Data storage: How are you storing your data, who has access to it, and
        when will you delete it?

Collecting data from users can help personalize and tailor product experiences. It
also implies both moral and legal responsibilities. While there has always been a
moral obligation to safe-keep data provided by users, new regulations
increasingly make it a legal one. In Europe, for example, the GDPR regulation
now sets strict guidelines regarding data collection and processing.
For organizations storing large amounts of data, data breaches represent a
significant liability risk. Such breaches both erode the trust of users in the
organization and often lead to legal action. Limiting the amount of data collected
thus limits legal exposure.
For our ML editor, we will start by using publicly available datasets, which were
collected with the agreement of users and are stored online. If we wanted to
record additional data, such as records of how our service is used in order to
improve it, we would have to clearly define a data collection policy and share it
with users.
In addition to data collection and storage, it is important to consider whether
using collected data may lead to poor performance. A dataset is appropriate to
use in some cases, but not in others. Let’s explore why.

Data Bias
Datasets are the result of specific data collection decisions. These decisions lead
to datasets presenting a biased view of the world. ML models learn from datasets
and thus will reproduce these biases.
For example, let’s say a model is trained on historical data to predict leadership
skills by forecasting the likelihood of a person becoming a CEO based on
information including their gender. Historically, according to the “The Data on
Women Leaders” fact sheet compiled by the Pew Research Center, most Fortune
500 CEOs have been male. Using this data to train a model will lead to it
learning that being male is a valuable predictor of leadership. Being male and
being a CEO are correlated in the chosen dataset due to societal reasons, which
led to fewer opportunities for women to even be considered for such roles. By
blindly training a model on this data and using it to make predictions, we would
simply be reinforcing biases of the past.
It can be tempting to consider data as ground truth. In reality, most datasets are a
collection of approximate measurements that ignore a larger context. We should
start with the assumption that any dataset is biased and estimate how this bias
will affect our model. We can then take steps to improve a dataset by making it
more representative and adjust models to limit their ability to propagate existing
bias.
Here are a few examples of common sources of errors and biases in datasets:
         Measurement errors or corrupted data: Each data point comes with
         uncertainty due to the method used to produce it. Most models ignore
         such uncertainty and can thus propagate systematic measurement errors.
         Representation: Most datasets present an unrepresentative view of a
         population. Many early face recognition datasets mostly contained
         images of white men. This led to models performing well for this
         demographic but failing on others.
         Access: Some datasets can be harder to find than others. For example,
         English text is easier to gather online than other languages. This ease of
         access leads to most of the state-of-the-art language models being
         trained exclusively on English data. As a consequence, English speakers
         will have access to better ML-powered services than non-English
         speakers. This disparity often is self-reinforcing, as the additional
         volume of users for English products helps make those models even
         better compared to ones for other languages.
Test sets are used to evaluate the performance of models. For this reason, you
should take special care to make sure that your test set is as accurate and
representative as possible.

Test sets
Representation appears in every ML problem. In “Split Your Dataset”, we
covered the value of separating data in different sets to evaluate a model’s
performance. When doing this, you should attempt to build a test set that is
inclusive, representative, and realistic. This is because a test set serves as a proxy
for performance in production.
To do this, when designing your test set, think of every user that could interact
with your model. To improve the chances that every user has an equally positive
experience, try to include examples representative of every type of user in your
test set.
Design your test set to encode product goals. When building a diagnosis model,
you’ll want to make sure that it performs adequately for all genders. To evaluate
whether that is the case, you’ll need to have them all represented in your test set.
Gathering a diverse set of point of views can help with this endeavor. If you can,
before deploying a model, give a diverse set of users an opportunity to examine
it, interact with it, and share feedback.
I want to make a final point when it comes to bias. Models are often trained on
historical data, which represents the state of the world in the past. Because of
this, bias most often affects populations that are already disenfranchised.
Working to eliminate bias is thus an endeavor that can help make systems fairer
for the people who need it most.
Systemic Bias
Systemic bias refers to institutional and structural policies that have led to some
populations being unfairly discriminated against. Because of this discrimination,
such populations are often over- or underrepresented in historical datasets. For
example, if societal factors have contributed to some populations being
historically overrepresented in criminal arrest databases, an ML model trained
from that data will encode this bias and carry it forward to modern-day
predictions.
This can have disastrous consequences and lead to the marginalization of subsets
of the population. For a concrete example, see J. Angwin et al.’s “Machine Bias”
ProPublica report, on ML bias for crime prediction.
Removing or limiting bias in a dataset is challenging. When trying to prevent a
model from being biased against certain features such as ethnicity or gender,
some have tried to remove the attribute in question from the list of features that a
model uses to make predictions.
In practice, simply removing a feature does not prevent a model from being
biased against it, because most datasets contain many other features that are
strongly correlated with it. For example, ZIP code and income are highly
correlated with ethnicity in the United States. If you remove only one feature, a
model may be just as biased, albeit in ways that are harder to detect.
Instead, you should be explicit about which fairness constraints you are trying to
enforce. For example, you could follow the approach outlined in the paper by M.
B. Zafar et al., “Fairness Constraints: Mechanisms for Fair Classification”,
where the fairness of a model is measured using the p% rule. The p% rule is
defined as “the ratio between the percentage of subjects having a certain
sensitive attribute value receiving a positive outcome and the percentage of
subjects not having that value receiving the same outcome should be no less than
p:100.” Using such a rule allows us to quantify bias and thus address it better,
but it requires keeping track of the feature we’d like a model not to be biased
against.
In addition to evaluating risk, biases, and errors in a dataset, ML requires
evaluating models.
Modeling Concerns
How can we minimize the risk of a model introducing undesirable bias?
There are multiple ways that models can impact users negatively. First, we’ll
tackle runaway feedback loops, and then we’ll explore the risks of a model
discreetly failing on a small segment of the population. We will then discuss the
importance of contextualizing ML predictions appropriately for users and end
this section by covering the risk of having nefarious actors abusing models.

Feedback Loops
In most ML-powered systems, having a user follow a model’s recommendation
will make it more likely for future models to make the same recommendation.
When left unchecked, this phenomenon can lead to models entering a self-
reinforcing feedback loop.
For example, if we train a model to recommend videos to users and our first
version of the model is slightly more likely to recommend videos of cats than
dogs, then users will watch more cat videos than dog videos on average. If we
train a second version of the model using a dataset of historical
recommendations and clicks, we will incorporate the first model’s bias into our
dataset, and our second model will favor cats much more heavily.
Since content recommendation models often get updated multiple times a day, it
would not take long before our most recent version of the model recommends
exclusively cat videos. You can see an example of this in Figure 8-1. Due to an
initial popularity of a cat video, the model progressively learns to recommend
more cat videos, until it reaches the state on the right, only ever recommending
cat videos.
                          Figure 8-1. Example of a feedback loop

Filling the internet up with cat videos might not seem like a tragedy, but you can
imagine how these mechanisms can rapidly reinforce negative biases and
recommend inappropriate or dangerous content to unsuspecting users. In fact,
models that attempt to maximize the probability of a user clicking will learn to
recommend clickbait content, content that is very tempting to click but does not
provide any value to the user.
Feedback loops also tend to introduce bias to favor a minority of very active
users. If a video platform uses the number of clicks on each video to train its
recommendation algorithm, it risks having its recommendation overfit to its
most active users who represent the vast majority of clicks. Every other user of
the platform would then be exposed to the same videos regardless of their
individual preferences.
To limit negative effects of feedback loops, choose a label that is less prone to
creating such a loop. Clicks only measure whether a user opens a video, not
whether they enjoy it. Using clicks as an optimization goal leads to
recommending more eye-catching content, without any concerns for its
relevance. Replacing the target metric with watch time, which is more correlated
with the user satisfaction, would help alleviate such a feedback loop.
Even then, recommendation algorithms that optimize for engagement of any sort
always carry the risk of degenerating into a feedback loop since their only
objective is to maximize a practically limitless metric. For example, even if an
algorithm optimizes for watch time to encourage more engaging content, the
state of the world that would maximize this metric is one where every user spent
their entire day watching videos. Using such engagement metrics may help
increase usage, but this raises the question of whether that is always a
worthwhile goal to optimize for.
In addition to the risk of creating feedback loops, models can also exhibit poorer
performance than expected in production despite receiving convincing scores on
offline validation metrics.

Inclusive Model Performance
In “Evaluate Your Model: Look Beyond Accuracy”, we covered a variety of
evaluation metrics that attempt to judge performance on different subsets of a
dataset. This type of analysis is helpful to ensure that a model performs equally
well for different types of users.
This is especially important when training new versions of existing models and
deciding whether to deploy them. If you only compare aggregate performance,
you could fail to notice a significant degradation of performance on a segment of
the data.
Failure to notice such degradation of performance has led to catastrophic product
failures. In 2015, an automated photo-tagging system categorized photos of
African American users as gorillas (see this 2015 BBC article). This is an
appalling failure and a consequence of not validating a model on a representative
set of inputs.
This sort of issue can arise when updating an existing model. Say you are
updating a facial recognition model, for example. The previous model had an
accuracy of 90%, and the new one has an accuracy of 92%. Before deploying
this new model, you should benchmark its performance on a few different
subsets of users. You may find that while the performance has slightly improved
in aggregate, the new model’s accuracy is performing very poorly for photos of
women over the age of 40, so you should abstain from deploying it. Instead, you
should modify the training data to add more representative examples and retrain
a model that can perform well for every category.
Omitting such benchmarks can lead to models not working for a significant
proportion of their intended audience. Most models will never work for every
possible input, but it is important to validate that they work for all expected ones.

Considering Context
Users will not always be aware that a given piece of information originated as a
prediction from a ML model. Whenever possible, you should share the context
of a prediction with a user, so they can make an informed decision as to how to
leverage it. To do so, you can start by describing to them how the model was
trained.
There is no industry-standard “model disclaimer” format yet, but active research
in this area has shown promising formats, such as model cards (see this article
by M. Mitchell et al., “Model Cards for Model Reporting”), a documentation
system for transparent model reporting. In the proposed approach, a model is
accompanied by metadata about how it was trained, which data it was tested on,
what its intended use is, and more.
In our case study, the ML Editor provides feedback based on a specific dataset of
questions. If we were to deploy it as a product, we would include a disclaimer
about the types of inputs the model is expected to perform well on. Such a
disclaimer could be as simple as “This product attempts to recommend better
ways to phrase a question. It was trained on questions from the writing Stack
Exchange and may thus reflect the particular preferences of that community.”
Keeping well-meaning users informed is important. Now, let’s look at potential
challenges that can come from less-friendly users.

Adversaries
Some ML projects need to consider the risk of having models be defeated by
adversaries. Fraudsters may attempt to fool a model that is tasked with detecting
suspicious credit card transactions. Alternatively, adversaries may want to probe
a trained model to glean information they should not be allowed to access about
the underlying training data, such as sensitive user information.

Defeating a model
Many ML models are deployed to protect accounts and transactions from
fraudsters. In turn, fraudsters attempt to defeat these models by fooling them into
believing they are legitimate users.
If you are trying to prevent fraudulent logins to an online platform, for example,
you may want to consider sets of features that would include the user’s country
of origin (many large-scale attacks use multiple servers from the same region). If
you train a model on such features, you risk introducing bias against
nonfraudulent users in countries where fraudsters live. In addition, relying only
on such a feature will make it easy for malicious actors to fool your systems by
faking their location.
To defend against adversaries, it is important to regularly update models. As
attackers learn existing patterns of defense and adapt their behavior to defeat
them, update your models so that they can quickly classify this new behavior as
fraudulent. This requires monitoring systems so that we can detect changes of
patterns in activity. We will cover this in more detail in Chapter 11. In many
cases, defending against attackers requires generating new features to better
detect their behavior. Feel free to refer to “Let Data Inform Features and
Models” for a refresher on feature generation.
The most common type of attack on models aims to fool them into a wrong
prediction, but other types of attacks exist. Some attacks aim to use a trained
model to learn about the data it was trained on.

Exploiting a model
More than simply fooling a model, attackers could use it to learn private
information. A model reflects the data it was trained on, so one could use its
predictions to infer patterns in the original dataset. To illustrate this idea,
consider the example of a classification model trained on a dataset containing
two examples. Each example is of a different class, and both examples differ
only by a single feature value. If you gave an attacker access to a model trained
on this dataset and allowed them to observe its predictions to arbitrary inputs,
they could eventually infer that this feature is the only predictive one in the
dataset. Similarly, an attacker could infer the distribution of features within the
training data. These distributions often receive sensitive or private information.
In the fraudulent login detection example, let’s imagine that ZIP code is one of
the required fields at login. An attacker could attempt to log in with many
different accounts, testing different ZIP codes to see which values lead to a
successful login. Doing so would allow them to estimate the distribution of ZIP
codes in the training set and thus the geographical distribution of this website’s
customers.
The simplest way to limit the efficiency of such attacks is to limit the number of
requests a given user can make, thereby limiting their ability to explore feature
values. This is not a silver bullet, as sophisticated attackers may be able to create
multiple accounts to circumvent such a limit.
The adversaries described in this section are not the only nefarious users you
should be concerned with. If you choose to share your work with the wider
community, you should also ask yourself whether it could be used for dangerous
applications.

Abuse Concerns and Dual-Use
Dual-use describes technologies that are developed for one purpose but can be
used for others. Because of ML’s ability to perform well on datasets of similar
types (see Figure 2-3), ML models often present a dual-use concern.
If you build a model that allows people to change their voice to sound like their
friends’, could it be misused to impersonate others without their consent? If you
do choose to build it, how could you include the proper guidance and resources
to make sure that users understand the proper use of your model?
Similarly, any model that can accurately classify faces has dual-use implications
for surveillance. While such a model may originally be built to enable a smart
doorbell, it could then be used to automatically track individuals across a city-
wide network of cameras. Models are built using a given dataset but can present
risks when retrained on other similar datasets.
There are currently no clear best practices on considering dual-use. If you
believe your work could be exploited for unethical uses, I encourage you to
consider making it harder to reproduce for that purpose or to engage in
thoughtful discussion with the community. Recently, OpenAI made the decision
to not release its most powerful language model because of concerns that it may
make spreading disinformation online much easier (see OpenAI’s announcement
post, “Better Language Models and Their Implications”). While this was a
relatively novel decision, I wouldn’t be surprised if such concerns are raised
more often going forward.
To conclude this chapter, in the next section I am sharing a discussion with Chris
Harland, currently director of engineering at Textio, who has an abundance of
experience deploying models to users and presenting the results with enough
context to make them useful.


Chris Harland: Shipping Experiments
Chris has a Ph.D. in physics and worked on a variety of ML tasks including
computer vision to extract structured information from receipts for expensing
software. He worked on the search team at Microsoft, where he realized the
value of ML engineering. Chris then joined Textio, a company that builds
augmented writing products to help users write more compelling job
descriptions. Chris and I sat down to discuss his experience shipping ML-
powered products and how he approaches validating results beyond accuracy
metrics.
Q: Textio uses ML to directly guide users. How is that different from other ML
tasks?
A: When you only focus on predictions, such as when to buy gold or who to
follow on Twitter, you can tolerate some amount of variance. When you do
guidance for writing, that is not the case, because your recommendations carry a
lot of subtext.
If you tell me to write 200 more words, your model should be consistent and
allow the user to follow its advice. Once the user writes 150 words, the model
can’t change its mind and recommend to lower the word count.
Guidance also requires clarity: “remove stop words by 50%” is a confusing
instruction, but “reduce the length of these 3 sentences” may help users in a
more actionable way. A challenge then becomes maintaining performance while
using features that are more human understandable.
Essentially, ML writing assistants guide the user through our feature space from
an initial point to a better one according to our model. Sometimes, this can
involve passing through points that are worse, which can be a frustrating user
experience. The product needs to be built with these constraints in mind.
Q: What are good ways to perform this guidance?
A: For guidance, precision is much more interesting than recall. If you think of
giving advice to a person, recall would be the ability to give advice in all
potential relevant domains and some irrelevant ones (of which there are many),
while precision would be giving advice in a few promising domains ignoring
potential other ones.
When giving advice, the cost of being wrong is very high, so precision is the
most useful. Users will also learn from recommendations that your model has
previously given and apply them unprompted to future inputs, which makes the
precision of these recommendations even more important.
In addition, since we surface different factors, we measure whether users
actually take advantage of them. If not, we should understand why not. A
practical example is our “active to passive ratio” feature, which was
underutilized. We realized that this was because of the recommendation not
being actionable enough, so we improved it by highlighting the words
themselves that we recommend changing.
Q: How do you find new ways to guide your users or new features?
A: Both top-down and bottom-up approaches are valuable.
Top-down hypothesis investigation is domain knowledge-driven and basically
consists of feature matching from prior experience. This can come from product
or sales teams, for example. A top-down hypothesis may look like “we believe
that there is something about the mystery aspect of recruiting emails that helps
drive engagement.” The challenge in top-down is usually to find a practical way
to extract that feature. Only then can we validate whether the feature is
predictive.
Bottom-up aims to introspect a classification pipeline to understand what it finds
predictive. If we have a general representation of text such as word vectors,
tokens, and parts of speech annotations that we then feed to ensembles of models
to classify as good or bad text, which features are most predictive of our
classification? Domain experts will often be the best equipped to identify these
patterns from a model’s predictions. The challenge is then to find a way to make
these features human understandable.
Q: How do you decide when a model is good enough?
A: You shouldn’t underestimate how far a small text dataset of relevant language
gets you. It turns out that using only a thousand documents in your domain is
enough for many use cases. Having an ability to label that small set of data is
worthwhile. You can then start by testing your model on out-of-sample data.
You should make it easy to run experiments. An overwhelming majority of the
ideas you have about changing your product end up having a net effect that is
null, which should allow you to be a little less worried about new features.
Finally, building a bad model is fine and is what you should start with. Fixing
the bad models will make your product much more robust to problems and help
it evolve faster.
Q: How do you see how a model is doing once it is in production?
A: When in production, expose your model’s predictions to users clearly and let
them override it. Log feature values, predictions, and overwrites so that you can
monitor them and analyze them later. If your model produces a score, finding
ways to compare this score to usage of your recommendations can be an
additional signal. If you are predicting whether an email will be opened, for
example, it can be extremely valuable to get access to the ground truth data from
your users so you can improve your model.
The ultimate success metric is customer success, which is the most delayed and
is influenced by many other factors.


Conclusion
We started by covering concerns with using and storing data. Then, we dove into
causes of bias in datasets and tips to identify and reduce them. Next, we looked
at the challenges that models face in the wild and how to reduce the risks
associated with exposing them to users. Finally, we looked at how to architect
systems so that they are designed to be resilient to errors.
These are complex issues, and the field of ML still has much to do to tackle all
potential forms of abuse. The first step is for all practitioners to be aware of
these concerns and to be mindful of them in their own projects.
We are now ready to deploy models. To start, we will explore the trade-offs
between different deployment options in Chapter 9. Then, we will cover methods
to mitigate some of the risks associated with deploying models in Chapter 10.
Chapter 9. Choose Your
Deployment Option

The previous chapters covered the process of going from a product idea to an
ML implementation, as well as methods to iterate on this application until you
are ready to deploy it.
This chapter covers different deployment options and the trade-offs between
each of them. Different deployment approaches are suited to different sets of
requirements. When considering which one to choose, you’ll want to think of
multiple factors such as latency, hardware and network requirements, as well as
privacy, cost, and complexity concerns.
The goal of deploying a model is to allow users to interact with it. We will cover
common approaches to achieve this goal, as well as tips to decide between
approaches when deploying models.
We will start with the simplest way to get started when deploying models and
spinning up a web server to serve predictions.


Server-Side Deployment
Server-side deployment consists of setting up a web server that can accept
requests from clients, run them through an inference pipeline, and return the
results. This solution fits within a web development paradigm, as it treats models
as another endpoint in an application. Users have requests that they send to this
endpoint, and they expect results.
There are two common workloads for server-side models, streaming and batch.
Streaming workflows accept requests as they come and process them
immediately. Batch workflows are run less frequently and process a large
number of requests all at once. Let’s start by looking at streaming workflows.

Streaming Application or API
The streaming approach considers a model as an endpoint that users can send
requests to. In this context, users can be end users of an application or an internal
service that relies on predictions from a model. For example, a model that
predicts website traffic could be used by an internal service that is charged with
adjusting the number of servers to match the predicted amount of users.
In a streaming application, the code path for a request goes through a set of steps
that are the same as the inference pipeline we covered in “Start with a Simple
Pipeline”. As a reminder, these steps are:

     1. Validate the request. Verify values of parameters passed, and optionally
        check whether the user has the correct permissions for this model to be
        run.
     2. Gather additional data. Query other data sources for any additional
        needed data we may need, such as information related to a user, for
        example.
     3. Preprocess data.
     4. Run the model.
     5. Postprocess the results. Verify that the results are within acceptable
        bounds. Add context to make it understandable to the user, such as
        explaining the confidence of a model.
     6. Return a result.

You can see this sequence of steps illustrated in Figure 9-1.
                            Figure 9-1. Streaming API workflow

The endpoint approach is quick to implement but requires infrastructure to scale
linearly with the current number of users, since each user leads to a separate
inference call. If traffic increases beyond the capacity of a server to handle
requests, they will start to be delayed or even fail. Adapting such a pipeline to
traffic patterns thus requires being able to easily launch and shut down new
servers, which will require some level of automation.
For a simple demo such as the ML Editor, however, which is only meant to be
visited by a few users at a time, a streaming approach is usually a good choice.
To deploy the ML Editor, we use a lightweight Python web application such as
Flask, which makes it easy to set up an API to serve a model with a few lines of
code.
You can find the deployment code for the prototype in the book’s GitHub
repository, but I’ll give a high-level overview here. The Flask application
consists of two parts, an API that takes in requests and sends them to a model for
processing using Flask, and a simple website built in HTML for users to input
their text and to display results. Defining such an API does not require much
code. Here, you can see two functions that handle the bulk of the work to serve
the v3 of the ML Editor:

  from flask import Flask, render_template, request

  @app.route("/v3", methods=["POST", "GET"])
  def v3():
      return handle_text_request(request, "v3.html")

  def handle_text_request(request, template_name):
      if request.method == "POST":
          question = request.form.get("question")
          suggestions = get_recommendations_from_input(question)
          payload = {"input": question, "suggestions": suggestions}
          return render_template("results.html", ml_result=payload)
      else:
          return render_template(template_name)


The v3 function defines a route, which allows it to determine the HTML to
display when a user accesses the /v3 page. It uses the function
handle_text_request to decide what to display. When a user first accesses the
page, the request type is GET and so the function displays an HTML template. A
screenshot of this HTML page is shown in Figure 9-2. If a user clicks the “Get
recommendation” button, the request type is POST, so handle_text_request
retrieves the question data, passes it to a model, and returns the model output.




                        Figure 9-2. Simple webpage to use a model

A streaming application is required when strong latency constraints exist. If the
information a model needs will be available only at prediction time and the
model’s prediction is required immediately, you will need a streaming approach.
For example, a model that predicts the price for a specific trip in a ride hailing
app requires information about the user’s location and the current availability of
drivers to make a prediction, which is available only at request time. Such a
model also needs to output a prediction immediately, since it must be displayed
to the user for them to decide whether to use the service.
In some other cases, the information required to compute predictions is available
ahead of time. In those cases, it can be easier to process a large number of
requests at once rather than processing them as they arrive. This is called batch
prediction, and we will cover it next.

Batch Predictions
The batch approach considers the inference pipeline as a job that can be run on
multiple examples at once. A batch job runs a model on many examples and
stores predictions so they can be used when needed. Batch jobs are appropriate
when you have access to the features needed for a model before the model’s
prediction is required.
For example, let’s say you’d like to build a model to provide each salesperson on
your team with a list of companies that are the most valuable prospects to
contact. This is a common ML problem called lead scoring. To train such a
model, you could use features such as historical email conversations and market
trends. Such features are available before a salesperson is deciding which
prospect to contact, which is when a prediction is required. This means you
could compute a list of prospects in a nightly batch job and have the results
ready to be displayed by the morning, when they will be needed.
Similarly, an app that uses ML to prioritize and rank the most important message
notifications to read in the morning does not have strong latency requirements.
An appropriate workflow for this app would be to process all unread emails in a
batch in the morning and save the prioritized list for when the user needs it.
A batch approach requires as many inference runs as a streaming approach, but it
can be more resource efficient. Because predictions are done at a predetermined
time and the number of predictions is known at the start of a batch, it is easier to
allocate and parallelize resources. In addition, a batch approach can be faster at
inference time since results have been precomputed and only need to be
retrieved. This provides similar gains to caching.
Figure 9-3 shows the two sides of this workflow. At batch time, we compute
predictions for all the data points and store the results we produce. At inference
time, we retrieve the precomputed results.




                          Figure 9-3. Example of batch workflow
It is also possible to use a hybrid approach. Precompute in as many cases as
possible and at inference time either retrieve precomputed results or compute
them on the spot if they are not available or are outdated. Such an approach
produces results as rapidly as possible, since anything that can be computed
ahead of time will be. It comes with the cost of having to maintain both a batch
pipeline and a streaming pipeline, which significantly increases the complexity
of a system.
We’ve covered two common ways of deploying applications on a server,
streaming and batch. Both of these approaches require hosting servers to run
inference for customers, which can quickly become costly if a product becomes
popular. In addition, such servers represent a central failure point for your
application. If the demand for predictions increases suddenly, your servers may
not be able to accommodate all of the requests.
Alternatively, you could process requests directly on the devices of the clients
making them. Having models run on users’ devices reduces inference costs and
allows you to maintain a constant level of service regardless of the popularity of
your application, since clients are providing the necessary computing resources.
This is called client-side deployment.


Client-Side Deployment
The goal of deploying models on the client side is to run all computations on the
client, eliminating the need for a server to run models. Computers, tablets,
modern smartphones, and some connected devices such as smart speakers or
doorbells have enough computing power to run models themselves.
This section only covers trained models being deployed on device for inference,
not training a model on the device. Models are still trained in the same manner
and are then sent to the device for inference. The model can make its way to the
device by being included in an app, or it can be loaded from a web browser. See
Figure 9-4 for an example workflow to package a model in an application.
           Figure 9-4. A model running inference on device (we can still train on a server)

Pocket-sized devices offer more limited compute power than powerful servers,
so this approach limits the complexity of the models that can be used, but having
models run on device can offer multiple advantages.
First, this reduces the need to build infrastructure that can run inference for every
single user. In addition, running models on devices reduces the quantity of data
that needs to be transferred between the device and the server. This reduces
network latency and can even allow an application to run with no access to the
network.
Finally, if the data required for inference contains sensitive information, having a
model run on device removes the need for this data to be transferred to a remote
server. Not having sensitive data on servers lowers the risk of an unauthorized
third party accessing this data (see “Data Concerns” for why this can be a serious
risk).
Figure 9-5 compares the workflow for getting a prediction to a user for server-
side models and client-side models. At the top, you can see that the longest delay
for a server-side workflow is often the time it takes to transfer data to the server.
On the bottom, you can see that while client-side models incur next to no
latency, they often process examples slower than servers because of hardware
constraints.
                        Figure 9-5. Running on a server, or locally

Just like for server-side deployment, there are multiple ways to deploy
applications client side. In the following sections, we will cover two methods,
deploying models natively and running them through the browser. These
approaches are relevant for smartphones and tablets, which have access to an
app store and web browser, but not for other connected devices such as
microcontrollers, which we will not cover here.

On Device
Processors in laptops and phones are not usually optimized to run ML models
and so will execute an inference pipeline slower. For a client-side model to run
quickly and without draining too much power, it should be as small as possible.
Reducing model size can be done by using a simpler model, reducing a model’s
number of parameters or the precision of calculations. In neural networks, for
example, weights are often pruned (removing those with values close to zero)
and quantized (lowering the precision of weights). You may also want to reduce
the number of features your model uses to further increase efficiency. In recent
years, libraries such as Tensorflow Lite have started providing useful tools to
reduce the size of models and help make them more easily deployable on mobile
devices.
Because of these requirements, most models will suffer a slight performance loss
by being ported on device. Products that cannot tolerate model performance
degradation such as ones that rely on cutting-edge models that are too complex
to be run on a device such as a smartphone should be deployed on a server. In
general, if the time it would take to run inference on device is larger than the
time it would take to transmit data to the server to be processed, you should
consider running your model in the cloud.
For other applications such as predictive keyboards on smartphones that offer
suggestions to help type faster, the value of having a local model that does not
need access to the internet outweighs the accuracy loss. Similarly, a smartphone
application built to help hikers identify plants by taking a photo of them should
work offline so that it can be used on a hike. Such an application would require a
model to be deployed on device, even if it means sacrificing prediction accuracy.
A translation app is another example of an ML-powered product that benefits
from functioning locally. Such an app is likely to be used abroad where users
may not have network access. Having a translation model that can run locally
becomes a requirement, even if it isn’t as precise as a more complex one that
could run only on a server.
In addition to network concerns, running models in the cloud adds a privacy risk.
Sending user data to the cloud and storing it even temporarily increases the odds
of an attacker getting access to it. Consider an application as benign as
superimposing filters on photos. Many users may not feel comfortable with their
photos being transmitted to a server for processing and stored indefinitely. Being
able to guarantee to users that their photos never leave the device is an important
differentiator in an increasingly privacy conscious world. As we saw in “Data
Concerns”, the best way to avoid putting sensitive data at risk is making sure it
never leaves the device or gets stored on your servers.
On the other hand, quantizing pruning and simplifying a model is a time-
consuming process. On-device deployment is only worthwhile if the latency,
infrastructure, and privacy benefits are valuable enough to invest the engineering
effort. For the ML Editor, we will limit ourselves to a web-based streaming API.
Finally, optimizing models specifically so they run on a certain type of device
can be time-consuming, as the optimization process may differ between devices.
More options exist to run models locally, including ones that leverage
commonalities between devices to reduce required engineering work. An
exciting area in this domain is ML in the browser.

Browser Side
Most smart devices have access to a browser. These browsers have often been
optimized to support fast graphical calculations. This has led to rising interest in
libraries that use browsers to have the client perform ML tasks.
The most popular of these frameworks is Tensorflow.js, which makes it possible
to train and run inference in JavaScript in the browser for most differentiable
models, even ones that were trained in different languages such as Python.
This allows users to interact with models through the browser without needing to
install any additional applications. In addition, since models run in the browser
using JavaScript, computations are done on the user’s device. Your infrastructure
only needs to serve the web page that includes the model weights. Finally,
Tensorflow.js supports WebGL, which allows it to leverage GPUs on the clients’
device if they are available to make computations faster.
Using a JavaScript framework makes it easier to deploy a model on the client
side without requiring as much device-specific work as the previous approach.
This approach does come with the drawback of increasing bandwidth costs,
since the model will need to be downloaded by clients each time they open the
page as opposed to once when they install the application.
As long as the models you use are a few megabytes or smaller and can be
downloaded quickly, using JavaScript to run them on the client can be a useful
way to lower server costs. If server costs ever became an issue for the ML
Editor, deploying the model using a framework like Tensorflow.js would be one
of the first methods I would recommend exploring.
So far, we’ve considered clients purely to deploy models that have already been
trained, but we could also decide to train models on clients. In the next part, we
will explore when this could be useful.


Federated Learning: A Hybrid Approach
We have mostly covered different ways to deploy models that we have already
trained (ideally by following the guidelines in the previous chapters) and that we
are now choosing how to deploy. We have looked at different solutions for
getting a unique model in front of all our users, but what if we wanted each user
to have a different model?
Figure 9-6 shows the difference between a system at the top that has a common
trained model for all users and one at the bottom where each user has a slightly
different version of the model.




                      Figure 9-6. One big model or many individual ones

For many applications such as content recommendation, giving writing advice,
or healthcare, a model’s most important source of information is the data it has
about the user. We can leverage this fact by generating user-specific features for
a model, or we can decide that each user should have their own model. These
models can all share the same architecture, but each user’s model will have
different parameter values that reflect their individual data.
This idea is at the core of federated learning, an area of deep learning that has
been getting increasing attention recently with projects such as OpenMined. In
federated learning, each client has their own model. Each model learns from
their user’s data and sends aggregated (and potentially anonymized) updates to
the server. The server leverages all updates to improve its model and distills this
new model back to individual clients.
Each user receives a model that is personalized to their needs, while still
benefiting from aggregate information about other users. Federated learning
improves privacy for users because their data is never transferred to the server,
which only receives aggregated model updates. This stands in contrast to
training a model the traditional way by collecting data about each user and
storing all of it on a server.
Federated learning is an exciting direction for ML, but it does add an additional
layer of complexity. Making sure that each individual model is performing well
and that the data transmitted back to the server is properly anonymized is more
complicated than training a single model.
Federated learning is already used in practical applications by teams that have
the resources to deploy it. For example, as described in this article by A. Hard et
al., “Federated Learning for Mobile Keyboard Prediction”, Google’s GBoard
uses federated learning to provide next-word predictions for smartphone users.
Because of the diversity of writing styles among users, building a unique model
that performs well for all users proved challenging. Training models at the user
level allows GBoard to learn about user-specific patterns and to provide better
predictions.
We’ve covered multiple ways to deploy models on servers, on devices, or even
on both. You should consider each approach and its trade-offs based on the
requirements of your application. As with other chapters in this book, I
encourage you to start with a simple approach and move to a more complex one
only once you’ve validated that it is necessary.


Conclusion
There are multiple ways to serve an ML-powered application. You can set up a
streaming API to allow a model to process examples as they arrive. You can use
a batch workflow that will process multiple data points at once on a regular
schedule. Alternatively, you can choose to deploy your models on the client side
by either packaging them in an application or serving them through a web
browser. Doing so would lower your inference costs and infrastructure needs but
make your deployment process more complex.
The right approach depends on your application’s needs, such as latency
requirements, hardware, network and privacy concerns, and inference costs. For
a simple prototype like the ML Editor, start with an endpoint or a simple batch
workflow and iterate from there.
Deploying a model comes with more than just exposing it to users, however. In
Chapter 10, we will cover methods to build safeguards around models to
mitigate errors, engineering tools to make the deployment process more
effective, and approaches to validate that models are performing the way they
should be.
Chapter 10. Build Safeguards for
Models

When designing databases or distributed systems, software engineers concern
themselves with fault tolerance, the ability for a system to continue working
when some of its components fail. In software, the question is not whether a
given part of the system will fail, but when. The same principles can be applied
to ML. No matter how good a model is, it will fail on some examples, so you
should engineer a system that can gracefully handle such failures.
In this chapter, we will cover different ways to help prevent or mitigate failures.
First, we’ll see how to verify the quality of the data that we receive and produce
and use this verification to decide how to display results to users. Then, we will
take a look at ways to make a modeling pipeline more robust to be able to serve
many users efficiently. After that, we’ll take a look at options to leverage user
feedback and judge how a model is performing. We’ll end the chapter with an
interview with Chris Moody about deployment best practices.


Engineer Around Failures
Let’s cover some of the most likely ways for an ML pipeline to fail. The
observant reader will notice that these failure cases are somewhat similar to the
debugging tips we saw in “Debug Wiring: Visualizing and Testing”. Indeed,
exposing a model to users in production comes with a set of challenges that
mirrors the ones that come with debugging a model.
Bugs and errors can show up anywhere, but three areas in particular are most
important to verify: the inputs to a pipeline, the confidence of a model, and the
outputs it produces. Let’s address each in order.

Input and Output Checks
Any given model was trained on a specific dataset that exhibited particular
characteristics. The training data had a certain number of features, and each of
these features was of a certain type. Furthermore, each feature followed a given
distribution that the model learned in order to perform accurately.
As we saw in “Freshness and Distribution Shift”, if production data is different
from the data a model was trained on, a model may struggle to perform. To help
with this, you should check the inputs to your pipeline.

Check inputs
Some models may still perform well when faced with small differences in data
distributions. However, if a model receives data that is very different from its
training data or if some features are missing or of an unexpected type, it will
struggle to perform.
As we saw previously, ML models are able to run even when given incorrect
inputs (as long as these inputs are of the right shape and type). Models will
produce outputs, but these outputs may be widely incorrect. Consider the
example illustrated in Figure 10-1. A pipeline classifies a sentence into one of
two topics by first vectorizing it and applying a classification model on the
vectorized representation. If the pipeline receives a string of random characters,
it will still transform it into a vector, and the model will make a prediction. This
prediction is absurd, but there is no way to know it only by looking at the results
of the model.




               Figure 10-1. Models will still output a prediction for random inputs
To prevent a model from running on incorrect outputs, we need to detect that
these inputs are incorrect before passing them to the model.


                         CHECKS VERSUS TESTS
  In this section, we are speaking of input checks, as opposed to the input tests
  we saw in “Test Your ML Code”. The difference is subtle but important.
  Tests validate that code behaves as expected given a known, predetermined
  input. Tests are commonly run every time code or models change to validate
  that a pipeline still works properly. The input checks in this section are part
  of the pipeline itself and change the control flow of a program based on the
  quality of inputs. Input checks that fail may result in running a different
  model or not running a model at all.

The checks cover similar domains to the tests in “Test Your ML Code”. In order
of importance, they will:

     1. Verify that all necessary features are present
     2. Check every feature type
     3. Validate feature values

Verifying feature values in isolation can be hard, as feature distributions can be
complex. A simple way to perform such validation is to define a reasonable
range of values a feature could take and validate that it falls within that range.
If any of the input checks fail, the model should not run. What you should do
depends on the use case. If the data that is missing represents a core piece of
information, you should return an error specifying the source of the error. If you
estimate that you can still provide a result, you can replace a model call with a
heuristic. This is an additional reason to start any ML project by building a
heuristic; it provides you with an option to fall back on!
In Figure 10-2, you can see an example of this logic, where the path taken
depends on the results of the input checks.
                    Figure 10-2. Example branching logic for input checks

Following is an example of some control flow logic from the ML Editor that
checks for missing features and feature types. Depending on the quality of the
input, it either raises an error or runs a heuristic. I’ve copied the example here,
but you can also find it on this book’s GitHub repository with the rest of the ML
Editor code.

  def validate_and_handle_request(question_data):
      missing = find_absent_features(question_data)
      if len(missing) > 0:
          raise ValueError("Missing feature(s) %s" % missing)

      wrong_types = check_feature_types(question_data)
      if len(wrong_types) > 0:
          # If data is wrong but we have the length of the question, run heuristic
          if "text_len" in question_data.keys():
              if isinstance(question_data["text_len"], float):
                  return run_heuristic(question_data["text_len"])
          raise ValueError("Incorrect type(s) %s" % wrong_types)

      return run_model(question_data)


Verifying model inputs allows you to narrow down failure modes and identify
data input issues. Next, you should validate a model’s outputs.

Model outputs
Once a model makes a prediction, you should determine whether it should be
displayed to the user. If the prediction falls outside of an acceptable range of
answers for a model, you should consider not displaying it.
For example, if you are predicting the age of a user from a photo, output values
should be between zero to a little over 100 years old (if you are reading this book
in the year 3000, feel free to adjust the bounds). If a model outputs a value
outside of this range, you should not display it.
In this context, an acceptable outcome is not only defined by an outcome that is
plausible. It also depends on your estimation of the kind of outcome that would
be useful to our user.
For our ML editor, we want to only provide recommendations that are
actionable. If a model predicts that everything a user wrote should be entirely
deleted, this would consist of a rather useless (and insulting) recommendation.
Here is an example snippet validating model outputs and reverting to a heuristic
if necessary:

  def validate_and_correct_output(question_data, model_output):
      # Verify type and range and raise errors accordingly
      try:
          # Raises value error if model output is incorrect
          verify_output_type_and_range(model_output)
      except ValueError:
          # We run a heuristic, but could run a different model here
          run_heuristic(question_data["text_len"])

      # If we did not raise an error, we return our model result
      return model_output


When a model fails, you can revert to a heuristic just as we saw earlier or to a
simpler model you may have built earlier. Trying an earlier type of model can
often be worthwhile because different models may have uncorrelated errors.
I’ve illustrated this on a toy example in Figure 10-3. On the left, you can see a
better-performing model with a more complex decision boundary. On the right,
you can see a worse, simpler model. The worse model makes more mistakes, but
its mistakes are different from the complex model because of the different shape
of its decision boundary. Because of this, the simpler model gets some examples
right that the complex model gets wrong. This is the intuition for why using a
simple model as a backup is a reasonable idea when a primary model fails.
If you do use a simpler model as a backup, you should also validate its outputs in
the same manner and fall back to a heuristic or display an error if they do not
pass your checks.
Validating that the outputs of a model are in a reasonable range is a good start,
but it isn’t sufficient. In the next section, we will cover additional safeguards we
can build around a model.




                    Figure 10-3. A simpler model often makes different errors


Model Failure Fallbacks
We have built safeguards to detect and correct erroneous inputs and outputs. In
some cases, however, the input to our model can be correct, and our model’s
output can be reasonable while being entirely wrong.
To go back to the example of predicting a user’s age from a photo, guaranteeing
that the age predicted by the model is a plausible human age is a good start, but
ideally we’d like to predict the correct age for this specific user.
No model will be right 100 percent of the time, and slight mistakes can often be
acceptable, but as much as possible, you should aim to detect when a model is
wrong. Doing so allows you to potentially flag a given case as too hard and
encourages users to provide an easier input (in the form of a well-lit photo, for
example).
There are two main approaches to detecting errors. The simplest one is to track
the confidence of a model to estimate whether an output will be accurate. The
second one is to build an additional model that is tasked with detecting examples
a main model is likely to fail on.
For the first method, classification models can output a probability that can be
used as an estimate of the model’s confidence in its output. If those probabilities
are well calibrated (see “Calibration Curve”), they can be used to detect
instances where a model is uncertain and decide not to display results to a user.
Sometimes, models are wrong despite assigning a high probability to an
example. This is where the second approach comes in: using a model to filter out
the hardest inputs.

Filtering model
On top of not always being trustworthy, using a model’s confidence score comes
with another strong drawback. To get this score, the entire inference pipeline
needs to be run regardless of whether its predictions will be used. This is
especially wasteful when using more complex models that need to be run on a
GPU, for example. Ideally, we would like to estimate how well a model will
perform on an example without running the model on it.
This is the idea behind filtering models. Since you know some inputs will be
hard for a model to handle, you should detect them ahead of time and not bother
running a model on them at all. A filtering model is the ML version of input
tests. It is a binary classifier that is trained to predict whether a model will
perform well on a given example. The core assumption between such a model is
that there are trends in the kind of data points that are hard for the main model. If
such hard examples have enough in common, the filtering model can learn to
separate them from easier inputs.
Here are some types of inputs you may want a filtering model to catch:

         Inputs that are qualitatively different from ones the main model
         performs well on
         Inputs that the model was trained on but struggled with
         Adversarial inputs that are meant to fool the main model
In Figure 10-4, you can see an updated example of the logic in Figure 10-2,
which now includes a filtering model. As you can see, the filtering model is only
run if the input checks pass, because you only need to filter out inputs that could
have made their way to the “Run Model” box.
To train a filtering model, you simply need to gather a dataset containing two
categories of examples; categories that your main model succeeded on and
others that it failed on. This can be done using our training data and requires no
additional data collection!




                 Figure 10-4. Adding a filtering step to our input checks (bolded)

In Figure 10-5, I show how to do this by leveraging a trained model and its result
on a dataset, as seen in the chart on the left. Sample some data points that the
model predicted correctly and some that the model failed on. You can then train
a filtering model to predict which of the data points are ones that the original
model failed on.




                     Figure 10-5. Getting training data for a filtering model
Once you have a trained classifier, training a filtering model can be relatively
straightforward. Given a test set and a trained classifier, the following function
will do just that.

  def get_filtering_model(classifier, features, labels):
      """
      Get prediction error for a binary classification dataset
      :param classifier: trained classifier
      :param features: input features
      :param labels: true labels
      """
      predictions = classifier.predict(features)
      # Create labels where errors are 1, and correct guesses are 0
      is_error = [pred != truth for pred, truth in zip(predictions, labels)]

      filtering_model = RandomForestClassifier()
      filtering_model.fit(features, is_error)
      return filtering_model


This approach is used by Google for their Smart Reply feature, which suggests a
few short responses to an incoming email (see this article by A. Kanan et al.,
“Smart Reply: Automated Response Suggestion for Email”). They use what they
call a triggering model, responsible for deciding whether to run the main model
that suggests responses. In their case, only about 11% of emails are suitable for
this model. By using a filtering model, they reduce their infrastructure needs by
an order of magnitude.
A filtering model generally needs to satisfy two criteria. It should be fast since
its whole purpose is to reduce the computational burden, and it should be good at
eliminating hard cases.
A filtering model that tries to identify hard cases doesn’t need to be able to catch
all of them; it simply needs to detect enough to justify the added cost of running
it on each inference. Generally, the faster your filtering model is, the less
effective it needs to be. Here is why:
Let’s say your average inference time using only one model is .
Your average inference time using a filtering model will be                   where
f is the execution time of your filtering model, and b is the average proportion of
examples it filters out (b for block).
To reduce your average inference time by using a filtering model, you thus need
to have                     , which translates to        .
This means the proportion of cases your model filters out needs to be higher than
the ratio between its inference speed and the speed of your larger model.
For example, if your filtering model is 20 times faster than your regular model (
           ), it would need to block more than 5% of cases (            ) to be
useful in production.
Of course, you would also need to make sure that the precision of your filtering
model is good, meaning that the majority of the inputs it blocks are actually too
hard for your main model.
One way to do this would be to regularly let a few examples through that your
filtering model would have blocked and examine how your main model does on
them. We will cover this in more depth in “Choose What to Monitor”.
Since the filtering model is different from the inference model and trained
specifically to predict hard cases, it can detect these cases more accurately than
by relying on the main model’s probability output. Using a filtering model thus
helps both decreasing the likelihood of poor results and improving resource
usage.
For these reasons, adding filtering models to existing input and output checks
can significantly increase the robustness of a production pipeline. In the next
section, we will tackle more ways to make pipelines robust by discussing how to
scale ML applications to more users and how to organize complex training
processes.


Engineer for Performance
Maintaining performance when deploying models to production is a significant
challenge, especially as a product becomes more popular and new versions of a
model get deployed regularly. We will start this section by discussing methods to
allow models to process large amounts of inference requests. Then, we will
cover features that make it easier to regularly deploy updated model versions.
Finally, we will discuss methods to reduce variance in performance between
models by making training pipelines more reproducible.

Scale to Multiple Users
Many software workloads are horizontally scalable, meaning that spinning up
additional servers is a valid strategy to keep response time reasonable when the
number of requests increases. ML is no different in this aspect, as we can simply
spin up new servers to run our models and handle the extra capacity.


                                               NOTE
     If you use a deep learning model, you may need a GPU to serve results in an acceptable time.
     If that is the case and you are expecting to have enough requests to require more than a single
     GPU-enabled machine, you should run your application logic and your model inference on two
     different servers.
     Because GPU instances are often an order of magnitude more expensive than regular instances
     for most cloud providers, having one cheaper instance scale out your application and GPU
     instances tackling only inference will significantly lower your compute costs. When using this
     strategy, you should keep in mind that you are introducing some communication overhead and
     make sure that this is not too detrimental to your use case.



In addition to increasing resource allocation, ML lends itself to efficient ways to
handle additional traffic, such as caching.

Caching for ML
Caching is the practice of storing results to function calls so that future calls to
this function with the same parameters can be run faster by simply retrieving the
stored results. Caching is a common practice to speed up engineering pipelines
and is very useful for ML.
Caching inference results
A least recently used (LRU) cache is a simple caching approach, which entails
keeping track of the most recent inputs to a model and their corresponding
outputs. Before running the model on any new input, look up the input in the
cache. If a corresponding entry is found, serve the results directly from the
cache. Figure 10-6 shows an example of such a workflow. The first row
represents the caching step when an input is initially encountered. The second
row depicts the retrieval step once the same input is seen again.




                     Figure 10-6. Caching for an image captioning model

This sort of caching strategy works well for applications where users will
provide the same kind of input. It is not appropriate if each input is unique. If an
application takes in photos of paw prints to predict which animal they belong to,
it should rarely receive two identical photos, so a LRU cache would not help.
When using caching, you should only cache functions with no side effects. If a
run_model function also stores results to a database, for example, using an LRU
cache will cause duplicate function calls to not be saved, which may not be the
intended behavior.
In Python, the functools module proposes a default implementation of an LRU
cache that you can use with a simple decorator, as shown here:

  from functools import lru_cache

  @lru_cache(maxsize=128)
  def run_model(question_data):
      # Insert any slow model inference below
      pass


Caching is most useful when retrieving features, processing them, and running
inference is slower than accessing a cache. Depending on your approach to
caching (in memory versus on disk, for example) and the complexity of the
model you are using, caching will have different degrees of usefulness.
Caching by indexing
While the caching method described is not appropriate when receiving unique
inputs, we can cache other aspects of the pipeline that can be precomputed. This
is easiest if a model does not only rely on user inputs.
Let’s say we are building a system that allows users to search for content that is
related to either a text query or an image they provide. It is unlikely that caching
user queries would boost performance by much if we expect queries to vary
significantly. Since we are building a search system, however, we have access to
a list of potential items in our catalog that we could return. This list is known to
us in advance, whether we are an online retailer or a document indexing
platform.
This means that we could precompute modeling aspects that depend only on the
items in our catalog. If we chose a modeling approach that allows us to do this
computation ahead of time, we can make inference significantly faster.
For this reason, a common approach when building a search system is to first
embed all indexed documents to a meaningful vector (refer to “Vectorizing” for
more on vectorization methods). Once embeddings are created, they can be
stored in a database. This is illustrated on the top row of Figure 10-7. When a
user submits a search query, it is embedded at inference time, and a lookup is
performed in the database to find the most similar embeddings and return the
products that correspond to these embeddings. You can see this illustrated in the
bottom row of Figure 10-7.
This approach significantly speeds up inference since most of the calculations
have been done ahead of time. Embeddings have been successfully used in large-
scale production pipelines at companies such as Twitter (see this post on
Twitter’s blog) and Airbnb (see this article by M. Haldar et al., “Applying Deep
Learning To Airbnb Search”.
                     Figure 10-7. A search query with cached embeddings

Caching can improve performance, but it adds a layer of complexity. The size of
the cache becomes an additional hyperparameter to tune depending on your
application’s workload. In addition, any time a model or the underlying data is
updated, the cache needs to be cleared in order to prevent it from serving
outdated results. More generally, updating a model running in production to a
new version often requires care. In the next section, we will cover a few domains
that can help make such updates easier.

Model and Data Life Cycle Management
Keeping caches and models up-to-date can be challenging. Many models require
regular retraining to maintain their level of performance. While we will cover
when to retrain your models in Chapter 11, I’d like to briefly talk about how to
deploy updated models to users.
A trained model is usually stored as a binary file containing information about its
type and architecture, as well as its learned parameters. Most production
applications load a trained model in memory when they start and call it to serve
results. A simple way to replace a model with a newer version is to replace the
binary file the application loads. This is illustrated in Figure 10-8, where the
only aspect of the pipeline that is impacted by a new model is the bolded box.
In practice, however, this process is often much more involved. Ideally, an ML
application produces reproducible results, is resilient to model updates, and is
flexible enough to handle significant modeling and data processing changes.
Guaranteeing this involves a few additional steps that we will cover next.




     Figure 10-8. Deploying an updated version of the same model can seem like a simple change

Reproducibility
To track down and reproduce errors, you’ll need to know which model is
running in production. To do so requires keeping an archive of trained models
and the datasets they were trained on. Each model/dataset pair should be
assigned a unique identifier. This identifier should be logged each time a model
is used in production.
In Figure 10-9, I’ve added these requirements to the load and save boxes to
represent the complexity this adds to an ML pipeline.
                 Figure 10-9. Adding crucial metadata when saving and loading

In addition to being able to serve different versions of existing models, a
production pipeline should aim to update models without significant downtime.

Resilience
Enabling an application to load a new model once it is updated requires building
a process to load a newer model, ideally without disrupting service to your users.
This can consist of launching a new server serving the updated model and slowly
transition traffic to it, but it quickly becomes more complex for larger systems. If
a new model performs poorly, we’d like to be able to roll back to the previous
one. Doing both of these tasks properly is challenging and would traditionally be
categorized in the realm of DevOps. While we won’t cover this domain in depth,
we will introduce monitoring in Chapter 11.
Production changes can be more complex than updating a model. They can
include large changes to data processing, which should also be deployable.

Pipeline flexibility
We previously saw that the best way to improve a model is often by iterating on
data processing and feature generation. This means that new versions of a model
will often require additional preprocessing steps or different features.
This kind of change is reflected in more than just the model binary and would
often be tied to a new version of your application. For this reason, the
application version should also be logged when a model makes a prediction in
order to make this prediction reproducible.
Doing so adds another level of complexity to our pipeline, depicted with the
added preprocessing and postprocessing boxes in Figure 10-10. These now also
need to be reproducible and modifiable.
Deploying and updating models is challenging. When building a serving
infrastructure, the most important aspect is to be able to reproduce the results of
a model running in production. This means tying each inference call to the
model that was run, the dataset that model was trained on, and the version of the
data pipeline that served this model.




                     Figure 10-10. Adding model and application version


Data Processing and DAGs
To produce reproducible results as described earlier, a training pipeline should
also be reproducible and deterministic. For a given combination of dataset,
preprocessing steps, and model, a training pipeline should produce the same
trained model on every training run.
Many successive transformation steps are required to building a model, so
pipelines will often break at different locations. This makes guaranteeing that
each part was run successfully and that they were all run in the right order.
One way to make this challenge easier is by representing our process of going
from raw data to trained model as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), with each
node representing a processing step and each step representing a dependency
between two nodes. This idea is at the core of dataflow programming, a
programming paradigm that the popular ML library TensorFlow is based on.
DAGs can be a natural way to visualize preprocessing. In Figure 10-11, each
arrow represents a task that depends on another one. The representation allows
us to keep each task simple, using the graph structure to express complexity.




                   Figure 10-11. An example of a DAG for our application

Once we have a DAG, we can then guarantee that we follow the same set of
operations for each model that we produce. There are multiple solutions to
define DAGs for ML, including active opensource projects such as Apache
Airflow or Spotify’s Luigi. Both packages allow you to define DAGs and
provide a set of dashboards to allow you to monitor the progress of your DAGs
and any associated logs.
When first building an ML pipeline, using a DAG can be unnecessarily
cumbersome, but once a model becomes a core part of a production system,
reproducibility requirements make DAGs very compelling. Once models are
being regularly retrained and deployed, any tool that helps systematize, debug,
and version a pipeline will become a crucial time-saver.
To conclude this chapter, I will cover an additional and direct way to guarantee
that a model is performing well—asking users.
Ask for Feedback
This chapter covered systems that can help ensure we give every user an
accurate result in a timely manner. To guarantee the quality of results, we
covered tactics to detect whether a model’s predictions are inaccurate. Why
don’t we ask users?
You can gather feedback from users both by explicitly asking for feedback and
by measuring implicit signals. You can ask for explicit feedback when displaying
a model’s prediction, by accompanying it with a way for users to judge and
correct a prediction. This can be as simple as a dialog asking “was this
prediction useful?” or something more subtle.
The budgeting application Mint, for example, categorizes each transaction on an
account automatically (categories include Travel, Food, etc.). As depicted in
Figure 10-12, each category is shown in the UI as a field the user can edit and
correct if needed. Such systems allow valuable feedback to be collected to
continuously improve models in a way that is less intrusive than a satisfaction
survey, for example.




                       Figure 10-12. Let users fix mistakes directly
Users cannot provide feedback for each prediction a model makes, so gathering
implicit feedback is an important way to judge ML performance. Gathering such
feedback consists of looking at actions users perform to infer whether a model
provided useful results.
Implicit signals are useful but harder to interpret. You shouldn’t hope to find an
implicit signal that always correlates with model quality, only one that does so in
aggregate. For example, in a recommendation system, if a user clicks on a
recommended item, you can reasonably assume that the recommendation was
valid. This will not be true in all cases (people click on the wrong things
sometimes!), but as long as it is true more often than not, it is a reasonable
implicit signal.
By collecting this information, as shown in Figure 10-13, you can then estimate
how often users found results useful. The collection of such implicit signals is
useful but comes with the added risk of collecting and storing this data and
potentially introducing negative feedback loops as we discussed in Chapter 8.
                     Figure 10-13. User actions as a source for feedback

Building implicit feedback mechanisms in your product can be a valuable way to
gather additional data. Many actions can be considered a mix of implicit and
explicit feedback.
Let’s say we added a “Ask the question on Stack Overflow” button to the
recommendations of our ML editor. By analyzing which predictions led to users
clicking this button, we could measure the proportion of recommendations that
were good enough to be posted as questions. By adding this button, we aren’t
directly asking users whether the suggestion is good, but we allow them to act on
it, thus giving us a “weak label” (see “Data types” for a reminder on weakly
labeled data) of question quality.
In addition to being a good source of training data, implicit and explicit user
feedback can be the first way to notice a degradation in performance in an ML
product. While ideally errors should be caught before being displayed to users,
monitoring such feedback helps detect and fix bugs quicker. We will cover this
in more detail in Chapter 11.
Strategies for deploying and updating models vary tremendously depending on
the size of a team and their experience with ML. Some of the solutions in this
chapter are excessively complex for a prototype such as the ML Editor. On the
other hand, some teams that have invested a significant amount of resources into
ML have built complex systems that allow them to simplify their deployment
process and guarantee a high level of quality to users. Next, I’ll share an
interview with Chris Moody, who leads Stitch Fix’s AI Instruments team and
will take us through their philosophy when it comes to deploying ML models.


Chris Moody: Empowering Data Scientists to
Deploy Models
Chris Moody came from a physics background from Caltech and UCSC and is
now leading Stitch Fix’s AI Instruments team. He has an avid interest in NLP
and has dabbled in deep learning, variational methods, and Gaussian processes.
He’s contributed to the Chainer deep learning library, contributed to the super
fast Barnes–Hut version of t-SNE to scikit-learn, and written (one of the few!)
sparse tensor factorization libraries in Python. He also built his own NLP model,
lda2vec.
Q: What part of the model life cycle do data scientists work on at Stitch Fix?
A: At Stitch Fix, data scientists own the entire modeling pipeline. This pipeline
is broad and includes things such as ideation, prototyping, design and debugging,
ETL, and model training in languages and frameworks such as scikit-learn,
pytorch, and R. In addition, data scientists are in charge of setting up systems to
measure metrics and building “sanity checks” for their models. Finally, data
scientists run the A/B test, monitor errors and logs, and redeploy updated model
versions as needed based on what they observe. To be able to do this, they
leverage the work done by the platform and engineering team.
Q: What does the platform team do to make data science work easier?
A: The goal of engineers on the platform team is to find the right abstractions for
modeling. This means they need to understand how a data scientist works.
Engineers don’t build individual data pipelines for data scientists working on a
given project. They build solutions that enable data scientists to do so
themselves. More generally, they build tools to empower data scientists to own
the entire workflow. This empowers engineers to spend more time making the
platform better and less time building one-off solutions.
Q: How do you judge the performance of models once they are deployed?
A: A big part of Stitch Fix’s strength is in making humans and algorithms work
together. For example, Stitch Fix spends a lot of time thinking about the right
way to present information to their stylists. Fundamentally, if you have an API
that exposes your model on one end and a user such as a stylist or merchandise
buyer on the other hand, how should you design interactions between them?
At first glance, you could be tempted to build a frontend to simply present the
results of your algorithm to users. Unfortunately, this can lead users to feel like
they have no control over the algorithm and the overall system and can lead to
frustration when it isn’t performing well. Instead, you should think about this
interaction as a feedback loop, allowing users to correct and adjust results. Doing
so lets users train algorithms and have a much larger impact on the entire process
by being able to give feedback. In addition, this allows you to gather labeled data
to judge the performance of your models.
To do this well, data scientists should ask themselves how they can expose a
model to a user in order to both make their job easier and empower them to
make the model better. This means that since data scientists know best what kind
of feedback would be the most useful for their models, it is integral for them to
own the process end-to-end up to this point. They can catch any errors because
they can see the entire feedback loop.
Q: How do you monitor and debug models?
A: When your engineering team builds great tooling, monitoring and debugging
get much easier. Stitch Fix has built an internal tool that takes in a modeling
pipeline and creates a Docker container, validates arguments and return types,
exposes the inference pipeline as an API, deploys it on our infrastructure, and
builds a dashboard on top of it. This tooling allows data scientists to directly fix
any errors that happen during or after deployment. Because data scientists are
now in charge of troubleshooting models, we have also found that this setup
incentivizes simple and robust models that tend to break more rarely. Ownership
of the entire pipeline leads individuals to optimize for impact and reliability,
rather than model complexity.
Q: How do you deploy new model versions?
A: In addition, data scientists run experiments by using a custom-built A/B
testing service that allows them to define granular parameters. They then analyze
test results, and if they are deemed conclusive by the team, they deploy the new
version themselves.
When it comes to deployment, we use a system similar to canary development
where we start by deploying the new version to one instance and progressively
update instances while monitoring performance. Data scientists have access to a
dashboard that shows the number of instances under each version and
continuous performance metrics as the deployment progresses.


Conclusion
In this chapter, we’ve covered ways to make our responses more resilient by
detecting potential failures of our model proactively and finding ways to
mitigate them. This has included both deterministic validation strategies and the
use of filtering models. We also covered a few of the challenges that come with
keeping a production model up-to-date. Then, we discussed some of the ways
that we can estimate how well a model is performing. Finally, we took a look at
a practical example of a company that deploys ML frequently and at large scale,
and the processes they have built to do so.
In Chapter 11, we will cover additional methods to keep an eye on the
performance of models and leverage a variety of metrics to diagnose the health
of an ML-powered application.
Chapter 11. Monitor and Update
Models

Once a model is deployed, its performance should be monitored just like any
other software system. As they did in “Test Your ML Code”, regular software
best practices apply. And just like in “Test Your ML Code”, there are additional
things to consider when dealing with ML models.
In this chapter, we will describe key aspects to keep in mind when monitoring
ML models. More specifically, we will answer three questions:

     1. Why should we monitor our models?
     2. How do we monitor our models?
     3. What actions should our monitoring drive?

Let’s start by covering how monitoring models can help decide when to deploy a
new version or surface problems in production.


Monitoring Saves Lives
The goal of monitoring is to track the health of a system. For models, this means
monitoring their performance and the quality of their predictions.
If a change in user habits suddenly causes a model to produce subpar results, a
good monitoring system will allow you to notice and react as soon as possible.
Let’s cover some key issues that monitoring can help us catch.

Monitoring to Inform Refresh Rate
We saw in “Freshness and Distribution Shift” that most models need to be
regularly updated to maintain a given level of performance. Monitoring can be
used to detect when a model is not fresh anymore and needs to be retrained.
For example, let’s say that we use the implicit feedback that we get from our
users (whether they click on recommendations, for example) to estimate the
accuracy of a model. If we continuously monitor the accuracy of the model, we
can train a new model as soon as accuracy drops below a defined threshold.
Figure 11-1 shows a timeline of this process, with retraining events happening
when accuracy dips below a threshold.




                        Figure 11-1. Monitoring to trigger redeploy

Before redeploying an updated model, we would need to verify that the new
model is better. We will cover how to do this later in this section, “CI/CD for
ML”. First, let’s tackle other aspects to monitor, such as potential abuse.

Monitor to Detect Abuse
In some cases such as when building abuse prevention or fraud detection
systems, a fraction of users are actively working to defeat models. In these cases,
monitoring becomes a key way to detect attacks and estimate their success rate.
A monitoring system can use anomaly detection to detect attacks. When tracking
every attempt to log in to a bank’s online portal, for example, a monitoring
system could raise an alert if the number of login attempts suddenly increased
tenfold, which could be a sign of an attack.
This monitoring could raise an alert based on a threshold value being crossed, as
you can see in Figure 11-2, or include more nuanced metrics such as the rate of
increase of login attempts. Depending on the complexity of attacks, it may be
valuable to build a model to detect such anomalies with more nuance than a
simple threshold could.




 Figure 11-2. An obvious anomaly on a monitoring dashboard. You could build an additional ML model to
                                       automatically detect it.

In addition to monitoring freshness and detecting anomalies, which other metrics
should we monitor?


Choose What to Monitor
Software applications commonly monitor metrics such as the average time it
takes to process a request, the proportion of requests that fail to be processed,
and the amount of available resources. These are useful to track in any
production service and allow for proactive remediation before too many users
are impacted.
Next, we will cover more metrics to monitor to detect when a model’s
performance is starting to decline.

Performance Metrics
A model can become stale if the distribution of data starts to change. You can see
this illustrated in Figure 11-3.




                    Figure 11-3. Example of drift in a feature’s distribution

When it comes to distribution shifts, both the input and the output distribution of
data can change. Consider the example of a model that tries to guess which
movie a user will watch next. Given the same user history as an input, the
model’s prediction should change based on new entries in a catalog of available
movies.

         Tracking changes in the input distribution (also called feature drift) is
         easier than tracking the output distribution, since it can be challenging
         to access the ideal value of outputs to satisfy users.
         Monitoring the input distribution can be as simple as monitoring
         summary statistics such as the mean and variance of key features and
         raising an alert if these statistics drift away from the values in the
         training data by more than a given threshold.
         Monitoring distribution shifts can be more challenging. A first approach
         is to monitor the distribution of model outputs. Similarly to inputs, a
         significant change in the distribution of outputs may be a sign that
         model performance has degraded. The distribution of the results users
          would have liked to see, however, can be harder to estimate.
One of the reasons for why estimating ground truth can be hard is that a model’s
actions can often prevent us from observing it. To see why that may be the case,
consider the illustration of a credit card fraud detection model in Figure 11-4.
The distribution of the data that the model will receive is on the left side. As the
model makes predictions on the data, application code acts on these predictions
by blocking any transaction predicted as fraudulent.
Once a transaction is blocked, we are thus unable to observe what would have
happened if we had let it through. This means that we are not be able to know
whether the blocked transaction was actually fraudulent or not. We are only able
to observe and label the transactions we let through. Because of having acted on
a model’s predictions, we are only able to observe a skewed distribution of
nonblocked transactions, represented on the right side.




   Figure 11-4. Taking action based on a model’s predictions can bias the observed distribution of data

Only having access to a skewed sample of the true distribution makes it
impossible to correctly evaluate a model’s performance. This is the focus of
counterfactual evaluation, which aims to evaluate what would have happened if
we hadn’t actioned a model. To perform such evaluation in practice, you can
withhold running a model on a small subset of examples (see the article by
Lihong Li et al., “Counterfactual Estimation and Optimization of Click Metrics
for Search Engines”). Not acting on a random subset of examples will then allow
us to observe an unbiased distribution of fraudulent transactions. By comparing
model predictions to true outcomes for the random data, we can begin to
estimate a model’s precision and recall.
This approach provides a way to evaluate models but comes at the cost of letting
a proportion of fraudulent transactions go through. In many cases, this trade-off
can be favorable since it allows for model benchmarking and comparisons. In
some cases, such as in medical domains where outputting a random prediction is
not acceptable, this approach should not be used.
In “CI/CD for ML”, we’ll cover other strategies to compare models and decide
which ones to deploy, but first, let’s cover the other key types of metrics to track.

Business Metrics
As we’ve seen throughout this book, the most important metrics are the ones
related to product and business goals. They are the yardstick against which we
can judge our model’s performance. If all of the other metrics are in the green
and the rest of the production system is performing well but users don’t click on
search results or use recommendations, then a product is failing by definition.
For this reason, product metrics should be closely monitored. For systems such
as search or recommendation systems, this monitoring could track the CTR, the
ratio at which people that have seen a model’s recommendation clicked on it.
Some applications may benefit from modifications to the product to more easily
track product success, similarly to the feedback examples we saw in “Ask for
Feedback”. We discussed adding a share button, but we could track feedback at a
more granular level. If we can have users click on recommendations in order to
implement them, we can track whether each recommendation was used and use
this data to train a new version of the model. Figure 11-5 shows an illustrated
comparison between the aggregate approach on the left side and the granular one
on the right.
   Figure 11-5. Proposing word-level suggestions gives us more opportunities to collect user feedback

Since I do not expect the ML Editor prototype to be used frequently enough for
the method described to provide a large enough dataset, we will abstain from
building it here. If we were building a product we were intending to maintain,
collecting such data would allow us to get precise feedback about which
recommendations the user found the most useful.
Now that we have discussed reasons and methods to monitor models, let’s cover
ways to address any issues detected by monitoring.


CI/CD for ML
CI/CD stands for continuous integration (CI) and continuous delivery (CD).
Roughly speaking, CI is the process of letting multiple developers regularly
merge their code back into a central codebase, while CD focuses on improving
the speed at which new versions of software can be released. Adopting CI/CD
practices allows individuals and organizations to quickly iterate and improve on
an application, whether they are releasing new features or fixing existing bugs.
CI/CD for ML thus aims to make it easier to deploy new models or update
existing ones. Releasing updates quickly is easy; the challenge comes in
guaranteeing their quality.
When it comes to ML, we saw that having a test suite is not enough to guarantee
that a new model improves upon a previous one. Training a new model and
testing that it performs well on held-out data is a good first step, but ultimately,
as we saw earlier, there is no substitute for live performance to judge the quality
of a model.
Before deploying a model to users, teams will often deploy them in what
Schelter et al., in their paper, “On Challenges in Machine Learning Model
Management”, refer to as shadow mode. This refers to the process of deploying a
new model in parallel to an existing one. When running inference, both models’
predictions are computed and stored, but the application only uses the prediction
of the existing model.
By logging the new predicted value and comparing it both to the old version and
to ground truth when it is available, engineers can estimate a new model’s
performance in a production environment without changing the user experience.
This approach also allows to test the infrastructure required to run inference for a
new model that may be more complex than the existing one. The only thing
shadow mode doesn’t provide is the ability to observe the user’s response to the
new model. The only way to do that is to actually deploy it.
Once a model has been tested, it is a candidate for deployment. Deploying a new
model comes with the risk of exposing users to a degradation of performance.
Mitigating that risk requires some care and is the focus of the field of
experimentation.
Figure 11-6 shows a visualization of each of the three approaches we covered
here, from the safest one of evaluating a mode on a test set to the most
informative and dangerous one of deploying a model live in production. Notice
that while shadow mode does require engineering effort in order to be able to run
two models for each inference step, it allows for the evaluation of a model to be
almost as safe as using a test set and provides almost as much information as
running it in production.
   Figure 11-6. Ways to evaluate a model, from safest and least accurate to riskiest and most accurate

Since deploying models in production can be a risky process, engineering teams
have developed methods to deploy changes incrementally, starting by showing
new results to only a subset of users. We will cover this next.

A/B Testing and Experimentation
In ML, the goal of experimentation is to maximize chances of using the best
model, while minimizing the cost of trying out suboptimal models. There are
many experimentation approaches, the most popular being A/B testing.
The principle behind A/B testing is simple: expose a sample of users to a new
model, and the rest to another. This is commonly done by having a larger
“control” group being served the current model and a smaller “treatment” group
being served a new version that we want to test. Once we have run an
experiment for a sufficient amount of time, we compare the results for both
groups and choose the better model.
In Figure 11-7, you can see how to randomly sample users from a total
population to allocate them to a test set. At inference time, the model used for a
given user is determined by their allocated group.
The idea behind A/B testing is simple, but experimental design concerns such as
choosing the control and the treatment group, deciding which amount of time is
sufficient, and evaluating which model performs better are all challenging issues.
                           Figure 11-7. An example of an A/B test

In addition, A/B testing requires the building of additional infrastructure to
support the ability to serve different models to different users. Let’s cover each
of these challenges in more detail.

Choosing groups and duration
Deciding which users should be served which model comes with a few
requirements. Users in both groups should be as similar as possible so that any
observed difference in outcome can be attributed to our model and not to a
difference in cohorts. If all users in group A are power users and group B
contains only occasional users, the results of an experiments will not be
conclusive.
In addition, the treatment group B should be large enough to draw a statistically
meaningful conclusion, but as small as possible to limit exposure to a potentially
worse model. The duration of the test presents a similar trade-off: too short and
we risk not having enough information, too long and we risk losing users.
These two constraints are challenging enough, but consider for a minute the case
of large companies with hundreds of data scientists who run dozens of A/B tests
in parallel. Multiple A/B tests may be testing the same aspect of the pipeline at
the same time, making it harder to determine the effect of an individual test
accurately. When companies get to this scale, this leads them to building
experimentation platforms to handle the complexity. See Airbnb’s ERF, as
described in Jonathan Parks’s article, “Scaling Airbnb’s Experimentation
Platform”; Uber’s XP as described in A. Deb et al.’s post, “Under the Hood of
Uber’s Experimentation Platform”; or the GitHub repo for Intuit’s open source
Wasabi.

Estimating the better variant
Most A/B tests choose a metric they would like to compare between groups such
as CTR. Unfortunately, estimating which version performed better is more
complex than selecting the group with the highest CTR.
Since we expect there to be natural fluctuations in any metric results, we first
need to determine whether results are statistically significant. Since we are
estimating a difference between two populations, the most common tests that are
used are two-sample hypothesis tests.
For an experiment to be conclusive, it needs to be run on a sufficient amount of
data. The exact quantity depends on the value of the variable we are measuring
and the scale of the change we are aiming to detect. For a practical example, see
Evan Miller’s sample size calculator.
It is also important to decide on the size of each group and the length of the
experiment before running it. If you instead continuously test for significance
while an A/B test is ongoing and declare the test successful as soon as you see a
significant result, you will be committing a repeated significance testing error.
This kind of error consists of severely overestimating the significance of an
experiment by opportunistically looking for significance (once again, Evan
Miller has a great explanation here).


                                                NOTE
    While most experiments focus on comparing the value of a single metric, it is important to also
    consider other impacts. If the average CTR increases but the number of users who stop using
    the product doubles, we probably should not consider a model to be better.
    Similarly, results of A/B tests should take into account results for different segments of users.
    If the average CTR increases but the CTR for a given segment plummets, it may be better to
    not deploy the new model.



Implementing an experiment requires the ability to assign users to a group, track
each user’s assignment, and present different results based on it. This
necessitates building additional infrastructure, which we cover next.

Building the infrastructure
Experiments also come with infrastructure requirements. The simplest way to
run an A/B test is to store each user’s associated group with the rest of user-
related information, such as in a database.
The application can then rely on branching logic that decides which model to run
depending on the given field’s value. This simple approach works well for
systems where users are logged in but becomes significantly harder if a model is
accessible to logged-out users.
This is because experiments usually assume that each group is independent and
exposed to only one variant. When serving models to logged out users, it
becomes harder to guarantee that a given user was always served the same
variant across each session. If most users are exposed to multiple variants, this
could invalidate the results of an experiment.
Other information to identify users such as browser cookies and IP addresses can
be used to identify users. Once again, however, such approaches require building
new infrastructure, which may be hard for small, resource-constrained teams.

Other Approaches
A/B testing is a popular experimentation method, but other approaches exist that
try to address some of A/B testing’s limitations.
Multiarmed bandits are a more flexible approach that can test variants
continually and on more than two alternatives. They dynamically update which
model to serve based on how well each option is performing. I’ve illustrated how
multiarmed bandits work in Figure 11-8. Bandits continuously keep a tally of
how each alternative is performing based on the success of each request they
route. Most requests are simply routed to the current best alternative, as shown
on the left. A small subset of requests gets routed to a random alternative, as you
can see on the right. This allows bandits to update their estimate of which model
is the best and detect if a model that is currently not being served is starting to
perform better.
                              Figure 11-8. Multiarmed bandits in practice

Contextual multiarmed bandits take this process even further, by learning which
model is a better option for each particular user. For more information, I
recommend this overview by the Stitch Fix team.


                                               NOTE
     While this section covered the usage of experimentation to validate models, companies
     increasingly use experimentation methods to validate any significant change they make to their
     applications. This allows them to continuously evaluate which functionality users are finding
     useful and how new features are performing.



Because experimentation is such a hard and error-prone process, multiple
startups have started offering “optimization services” allowing customers to
integrate their applications with a hosted experimentation platform to decide
which variants perform best. For organizations without a dedicated
experimentation team, such solutions may be the easiest way to test new model
versions.


Conclusion
Overall, deploying and monitoring models is still a relatively new practice. It is a
crucial way to verify that models are producing value but often requires
significant efforts both in terms of infrastructure work and careful product
design.
As the field has started to mature, experimentation platforms such as Optimizely
have emerged to make some of this work easier. Ideally, this should empower
builders of ML applications to make them continuously better, for everyone.
Looking back at all the systems described in this book, only a small subset aims
to train models. The majority of work involved with building ML products
consists of data and engineering work. Despite this fact, most of the data
scientists I have mentored found it easier to find resources covering modeling
techniques and thus felt unprepared to tackle work outside of this realm. This
book is my attempt at helping bridge that gap.
Building an ML application requires a broad set of skills in diverse domains such
as statistics, software engineering, and product management. Each part of the
process is complex enough to warrant multiple books being written about it. The
goal of this book is to provide you with a broad set of tools to help you build
such applications and let you decide which topics to explore more deeply by
following the recommendations outlined in “Additional Resources”, for
example.
With that in mind, I hope this book gave you tools to more confidently tackle the
majority of the work involved with building ML-powered products. We’ve
covered every part of the ML product life cycle, starting by translating a product
goal to an ML approach, then finding and curating data and iterating on models,
before validating their performance and deploying them.
Whether you’ve read this book cover to cover or dove into specific sections that
were most relevant to your work, you should now have the required knowledge
to start building your own ML-powered applications. If this book has helped you
to build something or if you have any questions or comments about its content,
please reach out to me by emailing mlpoweredapplications@gmail.com. I look
forward to hearing from you and seeing your ML work.
Index

A

A/B testing, A/B Testing and Experimentation
accuracy
     defined, Judge Performance
     looking beyond, Evaluate Your Model: Look Beyond Accuracy

adversarial actors
     abuse and dual-use, Abuse Concerns and Dual-Use, Monitor to Detect
     Abuse
     defeating ML models, Defeating a model
     exploiting models, Exploiting a model

aggregate metrics, Going beyond aggregate metrics, Inclusive Model
Performance
algorithms
     being the algorithm, The Simplest Approach: Being the Algorithm, Be the
     Algorithm
     classification and regression, Classification and regression
     clustering analysis, Explore and Label Efficiently
     k-means, Clustering
     supervised versus unsupervised, Models, Freshness and Distribution Shift

anomaly detection, Classification and regression, Monitor to Detect Abuse
Apache Airflow, Data Processing and DAGs
applications (see also ML-powered applications)
       building practical, Use ML to Build Practical Applications
       challenges of applying ML to, The Goal of Using Machine Learning
       Powered Applications
       determining what is possible, Estimate What Is Possible, Monica Rogati:
       How to Choose and Prioritize ML Projects
       process of building ML–powered, The ML Process

AUC (area under the curve), ROC Curve
automated photo tagging systems, Inclusive Model Performance
AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA), Our data has a temporal
aspect
autoregressive models, Trying to Do It All with ML: An End-to-End Framework

B

bag of words, Text data
batch predictions, Batch Predictions
BERT, Text data
bias
       data bias, Data Bias
       systemic bias, Systemic Bias

bias-variance trade-off, Judge Performance-Bias variance trade-off
black-box explainers, Black-Box Explainers, Extracting Local Feature
Importance
BLEU Score, Model Performance
Bokeh, Be the Algorithm
bounding boxes, Knowledge extraction from unstructured data

C

caching
     defined, Caching for ML
     by indexing, Caching by indexing
     inference results, Caching inference results

calibration curves, Calibration Curve, Using a Model’s Score
case study (writing assistant tool)
     assessing data quality, ML editor data inspection-ML editor data inspection
     data ethics, Data Ownership
     extracting recommendations, Extracting Recommendations from Models-
     Extracting Local Feature Importance
     feature generation, ML Editor Features
     framing in ML paradigm, Framing the ML Editor-Middle Ground: Learning
     from Our Experience
          being the algorithm, The Simplest Approach: Being the Algorithm
          end-to-end framework, Trying to Do It All with ML: An End-to-End
          Framework
          learning from data (classifier approach), Middle Ground: Learning
          from Our Experience

     initial prototype
          building, Prototype of an ML Editor-Generating Features
          evaluating, ML Editor Prototype Evaluation-User Experience

     mock-up diagram, Find the Correct ML Approach
    model comparison, Comparing Models-Version 3: Understandable
    Recommendations
    model evaluation
         feature importance, Directly from a Classifier
         top-k method, The k worst performing examples, Top-k method for the
         ML Editor

    model selection, ML Editor model
    model training
         judging performance, Judge Performance
         split datasets, ML Editor Data Split

    overview of, Our Case Study: ML–Assisted Writing
    performance metrics
         freshness and distribution shift, Freshness and Distribution Shift
         recommendation usefulness, Business Performance

    planning
         initial editor plan, Initial Plan for an Editor
         levels of increasing complexity, Measuring Success
         simple pipeline, Pipeline for the ML Editor
         simple starting model, Always Start with a Simple Model

    visualizing and exploring data
         inspecting and labeling using Bokeh, Be the Algorithm
         summary statistics, Summary statistics for ML editor

catalog organization, Catalog organization
CI/CD (continuous improvement/continuous delivery)
     A/B testing and experimentation, A/B Testing and Experimentation
     defined, CI/CD for ML
     shadow mode deployment, CI/CD for ML

classification and regression, Classification and regression, Middle Ground:
Learning from Our Experience, Contrast Data and Predictions
cleaning data, Parse and Clean Data
click-through rate (CTR), Business Performance, Calibration Curve, Business
Metrics
client-side deployment, Client-Side Deployment
clustering analysis, Explore and Label Efficiently, Clustering, Dimensionality
Reduction for Errors
code examples, obtaining and using, Using Code Examples
code quality estimation, The Simplest Scaffolding
collaborative filtering recommendation systems, Catalog organization
comments and questions, How to Contact Us
Common Crawl, Be Efficient, Start Small
computer vision, Classification and regression, Chris Harland: Shipping
Experiments
confidence scores, Filtering model
confusion matrices, Contrast Data and Predictions
considering application context, Considering Context
content-based recommendation systems, Catalog organization, Feedback Loops
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), From Product Goal to ML Framing,
Each data point is a combination of patterns
corrupted data, Data Bias
count vectors, Text data
counterfactual evaluation, Performance Metrics
cross-entropy, Model Performance, Optimization Problems
cross-validation, Validation set

D

data and datasets
     acquiring initial datasets, Data availability, Explore Your First Dataset
     assessing quality of, Insights Versus Products-ML editor data inspection
     assuring representative training data, Test set, Test sets
     common sources of errors in, Data Bias
     data leakage, Tabular data, Data leakage-ML Editor Data Split, Data
     Leakage
     data mismatch, Start with One Example
     data types, Data types
     determining available data, Models, Data availability
     expert advice on finding, labeling, and leveraging, Robert Munro: How Do
     You Find, Label, and Leverage Data?
     freshness and distribution shift, Freshness and Distribution Shift,
     Performance Metrics
     imperfect datasets, Data availability
     iterative nature of, Datasets are iterative, Iterate on Datasets
     life cycle management, Model and Data Life Cycle Management-Pipeline
     flexibility
     normalizing data, Tabular data
parsing and cleaning data, Parse and Clean Data
preprocessing data, ML editor data inspection, Validation set, Data
Processing and DAGs
publicly accessible data, Stand on the Shoulders of Giants, Be Efficient,
Start Small
quality, quantity, and diversity of data, Data quality, quantity, and diversity
removing bias from, Systemic Bias
role in machine learning, Do Data Science
split datasets, Split Your Dataset-Sample contamination
Stack Exchange, Initial Plan for an Editor
structured versus unstructured data, Knowledge extraction from
unstructured data
tangential datasets, Open data
time series data, Classification and regression, Our data has a temporal
aspect
training speech recognition systems, Data
validating data flow, Debug Wiring: Visualizing and Testing-Test model
outputs
visualizing and exploring data
     clustering analysis, Explore and Label Efficiently, Clustering
     dimensionality reduction, Dimensionality reduction
     exploratory data analysis, Examining the data
     finding data trends, Label to Find Data Trends, Data Trends
     process of labeling data, Be the Algorithm
     summary statistics, Summary Statistics
          vectorization, Vectorizing-Image data

     weakly labeled data, Data availability

data augmentation strategies, Data augmentation
data ethics
     data bias, Data Bias
     data ownership, Data Ownership
     questions you should ask, Considerations When Deploying Models
     resources for, Considerations When Deploying Models
     systemic bias, Systemic Bias

debugging
     generalization, Debug Generalization: Make Your Model Useful-Consider
     the Task at Hand
          data augmentation, Data augmentation
          data leakage, Data Leakage
          dataset redesign, Dataset redesign
          overfitting, Overfitting
          overly complex tasks, Consider the Task at Hand
          regularization, Regularization

     ML-specific best practices, ML-Specific Best Practices
     resources for, Software Best Practices
     software best practices, Software Best Practices
     testing ML code, Test Your ML Code-Test model outputs
          data ingestion, Test data ingestion
          data processing, Test data processing
          model outputs, Test model outputs

     training process, Debug Training: Make Your Model Learn-Optimization
     Problems
          optimization problems, Optimization Problems
          task difficulty, Task Difficulty

     validating data flow, Debug Wiring: Visualizing and Testing-Test model
     outputs
          cleaning and feature selection, Cleaning and feature selection
          data formatting, Data formatting
          data loading, Data loading
          feature generation, Feature generation
          initial steps, Start with One Example
          model output, Model output
          modular organization, Separate your concerns
          systematizing visual validation, Systematizing our visual validation
          visualization steps, Visualization steps

decision threshold, ROC Curve
decision trees, We want to ignore feature scale
deployment and monitoring
     deployability, Deployable
     deploying updated models to users, Model and Data Life Cycle
     Management
     deployment options
         client-side deployment, Client-Side Deployment
         hybrid approach, Federated Learning: A Hybrid Approach
         server-side deployment, Server-Side Deployment-Batch Predictions

    deployment planning
         data concerns, Data Concerns-Systemic Bias
         expert advice on shipping ML-powered products, Chris Harland:
         Shipping Experiments
         modeling concerns, Modeling Concerns-Abuse Concerns and Dual-
         Use
         questions you should ask, Considerations When Deploying Models

    monitoring and updating models
         CI/CD for ML, CI/CD for ML-Other Approaches
         key issues discovered by, Monitoring Saves Lives
         selecting metrics to monitor, Choose What to Monitor-Business
         Metrics

    safeguards for models
         creating robust pipelines, Engineer for Performance-Data Processing
         and DAGs
         expert advice on deploying ML models, Chris Moody: Empowering
         Data Scientists to Deploy Models
         incorporating user feedback, Ask for Feedback
         model failure fallbacks, Model Failure Fallbacks-Filtering model
         verifying data quality, Input and Output Checks-Model outputs

    shadow mode deployment, CI/CD for ML

detecting attacks, Monitor to Detect Abuse
dimensionality reduction, Dimensionality reduction, Dimensionality Reduction
for Errors
directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), Data Processing and DAGs-Data Processing
and DAGs
discounted cumulative gain (DCG), Modeling Results
distribution shift, Freshness and Distribution Shift-Freshness and Distribution
Shift, Performance Metrics
domain expertise, Leverage Domain Expertise
dropout, Regularization
dual-use technologies, Abuse Concerns and Dual-Use

E

Elbow method, Clustering
end-to-end frameworks
     challenges of, Trying to Do It All with ML: An End-to-End Framework
     debugging (see debugging)
     inference pipeline, The Simplest Scaffolding
     testing workflow, Test Your Workflow-Finding the impact bottleneck

error analysis
     detecting errors, Model Failure Fallbacks
     dimensionality reduction, Dimensionality Reduction for Errors
     modeling versus product domains, Finding the impact bottleneck

experimentation, A/B Testing and Experimentation
explainability, Understandable
exploratory data analysis (EDA), Examining the data
F

f1 score, defined, Judge Performance
fairness constraints, Systemic Bias
false positive rate (FPR), ROC Curve
fastText, Text data
feasibility, determining, Estimate What Is Possible, Monica Rogati: How to
Choose and Prioritize ML Projects-Monica Rogati: How to Choose and
Prioritize ML Projects, Measuring Success
feature crosses, Feature crosses
feature drift, Performance Metrics
feature generation
     building features out of patterns, Build Features Out of Patterns-Giving
     your model the answer
     defined, Classification and regression
     example of, Generating Features
     inspecting feature values, Feature generation
     visualizing hard examples, Dimensionality Reduction for Errors

feature importance
     evaluating, The Simplest Approach: Being the Algorithm, Evaluate Feature
     Importance
     extracting, Extracting Global Feature Importance

feature scale, ignoring, We want to ignore feature scale
feature selection, Classification and regression, Cleaning and feature selection
feature statistics, Using feature statistics
federated learning, Federated Learning: A Hybrid Approach
feedback loops, Feedback Loops
feedback, requesting, Ask for Feedback
filtering models, Filtering model
forecasting, Classification and regression, Insights Versus Products
fraud detection systems
     classifying individual examples, Classification and regression
     defending against attacks, Defeating a model, Monitor to Detect Abuse
     illustration of, Performance Metrics
     labeled or unlabeled data for, Models
     seasonality aspect of, Insights Versus Products

freshness, Freshness and Distribution Shift-Freshness and Distribution Shift

G

generative models, Generative models
global feature importance, Extracting Global Feature Importance
gradient descent, We want to ignore feature scale, Optimization Problems
gradient-boosted decision trees, We want to ignore feature scale
GroupShuffleSplit class, ML Editor Data Split
guardrail metrics, Business Performance

H

Harland, Chris, Chris Harland: Shipping Experiments
heuristics
    benefits of building, Measuring Success
    examples of great, The Simplest Scaffolding
    identifying good, Leverage Domain Expertise

I

image data
    automated photo tagging systems, Inclusive Model Performance
    knowledge extraction, Knowledge extraction from unstructured data
    selecting models based on, Each data point is a combination of patterns
    vectorizing, Image data-Image data

ImageNet, Image data, Image data
impact bottlenecks
    benefits of prototypes for identifying, Build Your First End-to-End Pipeline
    defined, Monica Rogati: How to Choose and Prioritize ML Projects
    finding, Finding the impact bottleneck

implementation
    challenges of end-to-end models, Trying to Do It All with ML: An End-to-
    End Framework
    quick to implement models, Quick to implement

implicit signals, measuring, Ask for Feedback
inclusive model performance, Inclusive Model Performance
indexing, Caching by indexing
inference pipeline, The Simplest Scaffolding
informing users, Considering Context
input checks, Check inputs
input distribution, Performance Metrics
Insight Data Science, The Simplest Scaffolding
interpretability, Understandable

J

Jaccard index, Other Models

K

k-means algorithm, Clustering
Kaggle, Be Efficient, Start Small
Keras, Image data
KISS (Keep It Stupid Simple), Software Best Practices
knowledge extraction
     from images, Knowledge extraction from unstructured data
     structured versus unstructured data, Knowledge extraction from
     unstructured data

L

L1 and L2 regularization, Regularization
labels
     applying efficiently, Explore and Label Efficiently
     labeled versus unlabeled data, Models
     levels of data availability based on, Data availability
     poorly formatted, Data formatting
     process of labeling data, Be the Algorithm

lead scoring, Batch Predictions
least recently used (LRU) cache, Caching inference results
life cycle management, Model and Data Life Cycle Management-Pipeline
flexibility
LIME, Black-Box Explainers, Extracting Local Feature Importance
linear regression, Our predicted variable is a linear combination of predictors
local feature importance, Extracting Local Feature Importance
logistic regression, Our predicted variable is a linear combination of predictors
loss functions, Optimization Problems
Luigi, Data Processing and DAGs

M

machine learning (ML)
     additional resources, Additional Resources
     approach to learning, A technical, practical case study
     best practices, ML-Specific Best Practices
     challenges of applying to applications, The Goal of Using Machine
     Learning Powered Applications
     data ethics and, Considerations When Deploying Models
     defined, Practical ML
     identifying the right ML approach, Find the Correct ML Approach-
     Conclusion, Measuring Success
     predicting success of applications using, Estimate What Is Possible
     prerequisites to learning, Prerequisites
    process of building ML–powered applications, The entire process of ML,
    The ML Process
    products powered by, The Goal of Using Machine Learning Powered
    Applications, Practical ML
    versus traditional programming, From Product Goal to ML Framing, Iterate
    on Datasets

mapping inputs to outputs, Data types
measurement errors, Data Bias
metrics (see performance metrics)
metrics for binary classification, ROC Curve
Minimum Viable Product (MVP), Build a Working Pipeline
ML writing assistants, Chris Harland: Shipping Experiments
ML-powered applications
    building initial prototype, Build a Working Pipeline-Conclusion
         first end-to-end pipeline, Build Your First End-to-End Pipeline-
         Conclusion
         initial dataset, Acquire an Initial Dataset-Conclusion

    deployment and monitoring, Deploy and Monitor-Conclusion
         building model safeguards, Build Safeguards for Models-Conclusion
         deployment options, Choose Your Deployment Option-Conclusion
         deployment planning, Considerations When Deploying Models-
         Conclusion
         monitoring and updating models, Monitor and Update Models-
         Conclusion

    determining what is possible, Estimate What Is Possible, Monica Rogati:
    How to Choose and Prioritize ML Projects-Monica Rogati: How to Choose
    and Prioritize ML Projects
    identifying the right ML approach, Find the Correct ML Approach-
    Conclusion
         creating a plan, Create a Plan-Conclusion
         from product goal to ML framing, From Product Goal to ML Framing-
         Conclusion

    iterating on models, The Simplest Scaffolding, Iterate on Models-
    Conclusion
         core parts of process, The Simplest Scaffolding
         debugging, Debug Your ML Problems-Conclusion
         training and evaluation, Train and Evaluate Your Model-Conclusion
         using classifiers for writing recommendations, Using Classifiers for
         Writing Recommendations-Conclusion

ML–powered applications
    build challenges, The Goal of Using Machine Learning Powered
    Applications
    build process overview, The entire process of ML-The ML Process

ML–powered editors, Our Case Study: ML–Assisted Writing (see also case
study)
model disclaimers, Considering Context
model metrics, Model Performance
models
    debugging (see debugging)
    evaluating
     calibration curves, Calibration Curve
     confusion matrices, Confusion Matrix
     contrasting data and predictions, Contrast Data and Predictions
     error analysis, Dimensionality Reduction for Errors
     feature importance, Evaluate Feature Importance-Black-Box
     Explainers
     looking beyond accuracy, Evaluate Your Model: Look Beyond
     Accuracy
     ROC curves, ROC Curve
     top-k method, The Top-k Method-Top-k method for the ML Editor

identifying failure modes and resolutions, Finding the impact bottleneck,
Test set, Engineer Around Failures-Filtering model
key to building successful, Going beyond aggregate metrics
levels of increasing complexity, Measuring Success
performance metrics, Model Performance-Model Performance
     generating additional model metrics, Model Performance
     making modeling tasks easier, Model Performance
     model precision, Model Performance
     reasonable expectations for, Model Performance

selecting, From Product Goal to ML Framing-Estimate What Is Possible,
The Simplest Appropriate Model-Going beyond aggregate metrics
     based on data patterns, From Patterns to Models
     benefits of prototypes for, Modeling Results
     data driven assumptions, Be the Algorithm
     determining deployability, Deployable
     estimating what is possible, Estimate What Is Possible
     flowchart for, Each data point is a combination of patterns
     quick to implement, Quick to implement
     scoring models based on simplicity, Deployable
     understandable models, Understandable

taxonomy of
     autoregressive, Trying to Do It All with ML: An End-to-End
     Framework
     catalog organization, Catalog organization
     classification and regression, Classification and regression
     end-to-end, Trying to Do It All with ML: An End-to-End Framework
     generative, Generative models
     knowledge extraction from unstructured data, Knowledge extraction
     from unstructured data
     labeled versus unlabeled data, Models, Data availability
     list of approaches, Models
     sequence-to-sequence, Trying to Do It All with ML: An End-to-End
     Framework
     structured versus unstructured data, Knowledge extraction from
     unstructured data
     supervised versus unsupervised, Models, Freshness and Distribution
     Shift

training
     data leakage, Data leakage
          eliminating undesirable bias in, Modeling Concerns-Abuse Concerns
          and Dual-Use
          judging performance, Judge Performance-Going beyond aggregate
          metrics
          relative proportions of data, Relative proportions
          split datasets, Split Your Dataset
          test datasets, Test set, Test sets
          validation datasets, Validation set

Moody, Chris, Chris Moody: Empowering Data Scientists to Deploy Models
movie recommendations, Catalog organization
multi-layer neural networks, Our predicted variable is a linear combination of
predictors
Munro, Robert, Robert Munro: How Do You Find, Label, and Leverage Data?

N

naive Bayes classifiers, Our predicted variable is a linear combination of
predictors
natural language processing, Text data, Robert Munro: How Do You Find, Label,
and Leverage Data?
neural networks, Optimization Problems
neural style transfer, Generative models
nonlinear models, Our predicted variable is a linear combination of predictors

O

object detection, Knowledge extraction from unstructured data, Other Models
offline metrics, Model Performance
one-hot encoding, Tabular data
open source code, Stand on the Shoulders of Giants, Open source code
optimization problems, Optimization Problems
outliers, Data quality, quantity, and diversity
output checks, Model outputs
overfitting, Bias variance trade-off, Overfitting

P

parsing and cleaning data, Parse and Clean Data
patterns
     building features out of, Build Features Out of Patterns-Giving your model
     the answer
     selecting models based on, From Patterns to Models

PCA (Principal Component Analysis), Dimensionality reduction
performance metrics
     business performance, Business Performance, Business Metrics
     deceptive nature of, Going beyond aggregate metrics
     freshness and distribution shift, Freshness and Distribution Shift-Freshness
     and Distribution Shift, Performance Metrics
     measuring success, Measuring Success
     model performance, Model Performance-Model Performance
           degradation of performance, Inclusive Model Performance
           generating additional model metrics, Model Performance
           making modeling tasks easier, Model Performance
            model precision, Model Performance
            reasonable expectations for, Model Performance

    speed, Speed

performance, engineering for
    data processing and DAGs, Data Processing and DAGs-Data Processing
    and DAGs
    model and data life cycle management, Model and Data Life Cycle
    Management-Pipeline flexibility
    scaling to multiple users, Scale to Multiple Users-Caching by indexing

pipelines
    creating robust, Engineer for Performance-Data Processing and DAGs
    debugging (see debugging)
    flexibility of, Pipeline flexibility
    types of, The Simplest Scaffolding

planning
    estimating scope and challenges, Estimate Scope and Challenges
    exploratory data analysis (EDA), Examining the data
    leveraging domain expertise, Leverage Domain Expertise
    simple starting model, To Make Regular Progress: Start Simple-Pipeline for
    the ML Editor
    understanding and reproducing existing results, Stand on the Shoulders of
    Giants-Bring both together

precision, defined, Judge Performance
preprocessing data, ML editor data inspection, Validation set, Data Processing
and DAGs
private information, protecting, Exploiting a model
product goals
    estimating scope and challenges, Estimate Scope and Challenges
    evaluating ML feasibility, Estimate What Is Possible, Measuring Success
    framing in ML paradigm, Framing the ML Editor-Middle Ground: Learning
    from Our Experience
         being the algorithm, The Simplest Approach: Being the Algorithm, Be
         the Algorithm
         end-to-end framework, Trying to Do It All with ML: An End-to-End
         Framework
         expert advice on, Monica Rogati: How to Choose and Prioritize ML
         Projects
         learning from data (classifier approach), Middle Ground: Learning
         from Our Experience
         overview of, Conclusion
         steps for, Estimate What Is Possible

    identifying failure modes and resolutions, Finding the impact bottleneck,
    Test set
    misalignment with model metrics, Create a Plan

product metrics, Business Performance
prototypes
    benefits of building, Modeling Results
    building initial, Build Your First End-to-End Pipeline, Prototype of an ML
    Editor-Generating Features
    evaluating, ML Editor Prototype Evaluation
     inference pipeline, The Simplest Scaffolding
     selecting heuristics, The Simplest Scaffolding
     testing workflow, Test Your Workflow-Finding the impact bottleneck

publicly accessible data, Open data

Q

questions and comments, How to Contact Us

R

random forests, We want to ignore feature scale, Regularization
recall, defined, Judge Performance
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), Our data has a temporal aspect
refresh rate, Monitoring to Inform Refresh Rate
regression and classification, Classification and regression, Middle Ground:
Learning from Our Experience, Contrast Data and Predictions
regularization, Regularization
representation, Data Bias
reproducibility, Reproducibility
resilience, Resilience
RGB images, Image data
ROC (receiver operating characteristic) curves, ROC Curve
Rogati, Monica, Monica Rogati: How to Choose and Prioritize ML Projects, Be
the Algorithm

S
sample contamination, Sample contamination
seasonality, Build Features Out of Patterns
segmentation masks, Knowledge extraction from unstructured data, Data
formatting
self-reinforcing feedback loops, Feedback Loops
sentence simplification model, Other Models
sentiment classification, Classification and regression, Summary Statistics
sequence-to-sequence models, Trying to Do It All with ML: An End-to-End
Framework
server-side deployment, Server-Side Deployment-Batch Predictions
shadow mode deployment, CI/CD for ML
SHAP, Black-Box Explainers
Silhouette plots, Clustering
simple models
     characteristics of, Simple Models
     scoring models based on simplicity, Deployable

Smart Reply feature, Filtering model
software best practices, Software Best Practices
spaCy, Text data
spam filters, Classification and regression
speech recognition systems, Data, Each data point is a combination of patterns,
Confusion Matrix
speed, Speed
Stack Exchange, Initial Plan for an Editor
Stack Overflow, Framing the ML Editor
standard score, Tabular data
streaming applications, Streaming Application or API
structured data, Knowledge extraction from unstructured data
subtitle generation, Generative models
summarization tasks, Generative models
summary statistics, Summary Statistics, Performance Metrics
supervised algorithms, Models, Freshness and Distribution Shift
systemic bias, Systemic Bias

T

t-SNE, Dimensionality reduction
tabular data, vectorizing, Tabular data-Tabular data
tangential datasets, Open data
task difficulty
     data quality, quantity, and diversity, Data quality, quantity, and diversity
     data representation, Data representation, Test sets
     model capacity, Model capacity
     overview of, Task Difficulty

temporal data leakage, Temporal data leakage
Tensorboard, Optimization Problems
tensors, Image data
test sets, Test set, Test sets
text data
     classifying, Each data point is a combination of patterns
     properly formatted, Data formatting
     tokenizing, Tokenizing Text
     vectorizing, Text data-Text data

TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency), Text data
time series data, Classification and regression, Our data has a temporal aspect,
Temporal data leakage
tokenization, Tokenizing Text
top-k method
     identifying challenging data points with, The Top-k Method
     implementation tips, Top-k implementation tips
     k best performing examples, The k best performing examples
     k most uncertain examples, The k most uncertain examples
     k worst performing examples, The k worst performing examples

training loss, Data Leakage
transfer learning, Image data
translation invariant filters, Each data point is a combination of patterns
translation tasks, Generative models, Trying to Do It All with ML: An End-to-
End Framework
triggering models, Filtering model
true positive rate (TPR), ROC Curve

U

ULMFit, Text data
UMAP, Dimensionality reduction
underfitting, Bias variance trade-off, Overfitting
understandable models, Understandable
Unix time, Raw datetime
unstructured data, Knowledge extraction from unstructured data
unsupervised algorithms, Models
usage metrics, Model Performance
user experience, evaluating, User Experience, User Experience, Ask for
Feedback

V

validation loss, Data Leakage
validation sets, Validation set
vectorization
     data leakage and, Tabular data
     defined, Vectorizing
     image data, Image data-Image data
     tabular data, Tabular data-Tabular data
     text data, Text data-Text data

VGG, Image data
visualization libraries, Be the Algorithm

W

weak labels, Always Start with a Simple Model
weakly labeled data, Data availability
weakly supervised algorithms, Models
weight histograms, Optimization Problems
WikiText, Image data
window size, Text data
word embeddings, pretrained, Text data
Word2Vec, Text data
workflow, testing, Test Your Workflow-Finding the impact bottleneck
writing assistant tool, Our Case Study: ML–Assisted Writing, Chris Harland:
Shipping Experiments (see also case study)
writing recommendation systems
     best way to iterate, Other Models
     comparing models, Comparing Models-Version 3: Understandable
     Recommendations
          heuristic-based version, Version 1: The Report Card
          key metrics, Comparing Models
          leveraging features explainable to users, Version 3: Understandable
          Recommendations
          simple model, Version 2: More Powerful, More Unclear

     extracting recommendations from models, Extracting Recommendations
     from Models-Extracting Local Feature Importance
          using a model's score, Using a Model’s Score
          using feature statistics, Using feature statistics
          using global feature importance, Extracting Global Feature Importance
         using local feature importance, Extracting Local Feature Importance

    generating editing recommendations, Generating Editing
    Recommendations-Generating Editing Recommendations
    judging performance of, Model Performance
    monitoring, Business Metrics

X

XGBoost, We want to ignore feature scale
About the Author
Emmanuel Ameisen has been building ML-powered products for years. He is
currently working on ML engineering at Stripe. Previously, he was head of AI at
Insight Data Science, where he led more than 150 ML projects. Before,
Emmanuel was a data scientist at Zipcar, where he worked on on-demand
prediction and building frameworks and services to help deploy ML models in
production. He has a background at the intersection of ML and business, with an
M.S. in AI from Université Paris-Sud, an M.S. in Engineering from
CentraleSupélec, and an M.S. in Management from ESCP Europe.
Colophon
The animal on the cover of Building Machine Learning Powered Applications is
the poplar admiral butterfly (Limenitis populi). This butterfly is a large but
increasingly rare butterfly of North Africa, northern Asia, the Middle East, and
Europe.
Poplar admirals have a three-inch wingspan. Its wings are white-spotted dark
brown above with margins of slate and orange, and undersides marked in orange.
In late August, butterflies lay their eggs on the leaves of poplar trees (mostly
trembling aspen, Populus tremula), as the caterpillars eat only these leaves.
Caterpillars have horn-like appendages, and molt through shades of green and
brown as they grow, for camouflage. They begin growing in late summer, but in
the fall start spinning silk for a protective cocoon where they overwinter. In
spring, they re-emerge as the first poplar leaves bud and immediately begin
feeding, to complete their final transition: in late May, they attach themselves
with silk to a leaf and grow a hard surface skin in which they pupate, emerging
as butterflies in June and July.
Unlike most butterflies, poplar admirals do not visit flowers for nectar, instead
using their probing proboscis to draw food and nutrients from carrion, animal
droppings, tree sap, and the salts in mud (and at times the salts in human sweat).
They seem attracted to smells of decomposition.
Poplar admiral numbers are declining as deciduous forests are cleared for
development, though its current IUCN Red List is “Least Concern.” Many of the
animals on O’Reilly covers are endangered; all of them are important to the
world.
The color illustration on the cover is by Jose Marzan Jr., based on a black-and-
white engraving from the Meyers Kleines Lexicon. The cover fonts are Gilroy
Semibold and Guardian Sans. The text font is Adobe Minion Pro; the heading
font is Adobe Myriad Condensed; and the code font is Dalton Maag’s Ubuntu
Mono.
