       Praise for The Ultimate LinkedIn®
               Messaging Guide


No one spends more time on studying how to use LinkedIn to engage prospects.
Of all the social sites, LinkedIn is the most useful, but only if you know how to use
it. If you want to use LinkedIn, read and apply Daniel Disney’s book.
        Anthony Iannarino – Author of The Only Sales Guide You’ll Ever Need,
                                The Lost Art of Closing and Eat Their Lunch

Daniel is an authority in the Social Selling space and this book further solidi-
fies that notion. You will get actionable advice and more insight than you ever
dreamed possible when it comes to LinkedIn and the social game you need to be
playing. Brilliant read! Pick up this book and start changing the game.
                                    Dale Dupree – Leader of The Sales Rebellion

LinkedIn holds the golden keys to sales at all levels. Daniel Disney knows how to
use the keys to open doors and close business. There are hundreds of LinkedIn
“experts,” but Daniel doesn’t just talk the talk, he walks the walk. From creating
The Daily Sales to closing The Million Pound Sale, Daniel’s easy to follow tips will
give you new ways to improve your LinkedIn results.
                             Alison Edgar – Author of Secrets of Successful Sales

LinkedIn is vital for your business, yet most people are not using it effectively.
The UK’s Number 1 Social Selling expert, Daniel Disney, solves this problem by
showing you easy-­to-­implement techniques and tips that will make your LinkedIn
profile shine and help you generate more awareness and revenue for your business.
I’ve read many LinkedIn books, and this is my favourite. Don’t delay and buy your
copy now to make a difference in your business.
              Niraj Kapur -­Expert Sales Coach, Trainer and Author – Amazon
                                           ­bestseller Everybody Works in Sales

This book unlocks simple but powerful strategies for winning on LinkedIn.
Whether you are a seasoned LinkedIn pro or a green LinkedIn newbie, this book
is for you. My favourites were the 25 message templates which are jam-­packed
with instructions for when and how to use them.
Daniel Disney is the real deal; he has real followers, real successes, and is the num-
ber one influencer on LinkedIn. That stands him out from the LinkedIn crowd as
the go-­to expert. If you’re going to listen to one person on the subject of LinkedIn,
make it Daniel.

Better still, buy his book, read it on the plane/train/automobile (he has packed it
with content, not waffle), and start applying it the moment you land.
                 Gavin Ingham -­Founder of #IAM10 & Author of Be More, Do
                                                          More, Sell More

Daniel teaches me something every time I read his content on LinkedIn, and
what I learned after his LinkedIn/Social Selling Masterclass has helped me gener-
ate some great results on social media. After reading his new book, The Ultimate
LinkedIn Messaging Guide, I had no doubt straight away that this would be the
reference guide for so many sellers out there.

You have given the roadmap for all to follow, the question you will pose to every
reader is, what will they do with these golden nuggets? Will they make their own
million-­pound sale or watch while others make theirs?!
        Steve Knapp – Founder of The Sales Growth Club, Expert Sales Coach,
                                                      Trainer & Consultant

Although I had the good fortune to have worked directly for LinkedIn, few people
on or at LinkedIn impressed me with the frequency, consistency and relevancy of
content to inspire salespeople to leverage social media as much as Daniel Disney.

His dedication to providing valuable content to the world’s sales community is
second to none. What I love about this book is that it gets deep, tactical and practi-
cal with excellent tips you can leverage to inspire greater confidence in your sales
efforts on LinkedIn. Highly recommend reading and sending around your team.
       James Ski, Former LinkedIn Director and now Founder & CEO of Sales
                       Confidence – the world’s largest B2B Sales community

In a sea of wishy-­washy blog posts and crappy video content from so-­called “social
guru’s,” Daniel has bucked the trend and put together a step-­by-­step guide to engi-
neering success on LinkedIn that anyone can follow.
                                     Will Barron – Host of The Salesman Podcast

It’s rare that a book can connect with you as a friend, mentor you as a teacher,
correct you as a parent and encourage you as a colleague. This book does exactly
that. Daniel’s informal voice and delivery make this book an easy read that you
simply cannot put down. Even as I read it, I knew I’d be referencing the content,
templates and how-­to tactics over and over again; it will be front-­and-­centre on
my bookshelf.

Of particular note are the many templates that Daniel provides, along with the
use-­case instructions and explanations for each of them. Whether you’re a novice
or an industry veteran, you WILL get immediate value from them, and you WILL
be using them over and over again. This book is a must-­read and a must-­share.
                     Darryl Praill – CMO at VanillaSoft & Host of The INSIDE,
                                                          Inside Sales Podcast
 THE ULTIMATE
   LINKEDIN®
MESSAGING GUIDE
 THE ULTIMATE
   LINKEDIN®

MESSAGING GUIDE
 HOW TO USE WRITTEN, AUDIO,
 VIDEO AND IN MAIL MESSAGES
TO START MORE CONVERSATIONS
     AND INCREASE SALES



     DANIEL DISNEY
This edition first published 2023
Copyright © 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material from
this title is available at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
The right of Daniel Disney to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance
with law.
Registered Offices
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial Office
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley
products visit us at www.wiley.com.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print-­on-­demand. Some
content that appears in standard print versions of this book may not be available in other formats.
Trademarks: Wiley and the Wiley logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries and may not be used without
written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty
While the publisher and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this work, they make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this
work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties
of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by
sales representatives, written sales materials or promotional statements for this work. This work is
sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. The
advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with
a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an organization, website, or product is referred to in this
work as a citation and/or potential source of further information does not mean that the publisher
and authors endorse the information or services the organization, website, or product may provide or
recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may
have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. Neither the
publisher nor authors shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including
but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is Available:
ISBN 9781394185221 (Hardback)
ISBN 9781394187867 (ePDF)
ISBN 9781394187850 (ePub)
Cover Design and Image: Wiley
             THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED TO FOUR PEOPLE:

Uncle Al – The man who inspired me to get into sales and taught me
to be the best salesperson I could possibly be. Not a day goes by that
I don’t wish you were still here to guide me, to see what I’ve achieved
and to read my book. I hope it would have made you proud.

Laurie – You stand by me whilst I put everything into my career.
When I worked late nights and weekends trying to grow The Daily
Sales and my Social Selling Masterclass, you did everything you could
to make it as easy as possible for me. I’m so lucky to have you in my
life, and I will do everything I can to provide the best possible life for
you and our boys.

Joshua and Lewis – My two sons, you are the reason I work so hard
and you are the ones who make it all worthwhile. I love you more
than anything in this world and am so proud of you both and the
wonderful men that you are becoming.


Thank you for being such a huge part of my world and being the
driving force behind all I do.
                    CONTENTS


Dedicationix
Foreword by Chris Murray                           xv
About the Author                                   xix
Introductionxxiii

Part 1 Prospecting With Messages                    1
Chapter 1  Motivation To Message                    3
Chapter 2  The Prospecting Maze                     7
Chapter 3  Outbound Social Selling                 13

Part 2 Research & Personalisation                  19
Chapter 4  Why Aren’t People Replying?             21
Chapter 5  Research, Personalisation & Relevance   25
Chapter 6  The One Thing To Avoid                  31
Chapter 7  No One Likes Spam Messages              37




                              xi
                           Contents




Part 3 LinkedIn Messaging Thoughts                      49
Chapter 8  InMail VERSUS Message                        51
Chapter 9  WHEN To Send A Message On LinkedIn           55
Chapter 10 One Size Doesn’t Fit All                     59

Part 4 Written LinkedIn Messages                        63
Chapter 11 The Seven-Figure LinkedIn Message            65
Chapter 12 25 Written Sales Message Templates           81
Chapter 13 Top Written Message Tips                    117

Part 5 Audio LinkedIn Messages                         119
Chapter 14 Audio Voice Notes On LinkedIn               121
Chapter 15 How To Send Audio Voice Notes On LinkedIn   125
Chapter 16 The Two MOST IMPORTANT Components           129
Chapter 17 LinkedIn Audio Voice Notes Sales Scripts    133
Chapter 17a BONUS CHAPTER – Audio Voice Notes 101      141

Part 6 Video LinkedIn Messages                         147
Chapter 18 Video Messages On LinkedIn                  149
Chapter 19 From Video To Sale In 24 Hours              153
Chapter 20 Ten Video Sales Message Scripts             159
Chapter 20a BONUS CHAPTER – Sending LinkedIn
            Video Messages                             169

Part 7 InMail Messages On Sales Navigator              177
Chapter 21 InMail Messages On LinkedIn                 179
Chapter 22 InMail Subject Lines                        183
Chapter 23 Ten InMail Sales Templates                  185




                              xii
                              Contents




Part 8 Follow Up, Replies & Converting To Sales      197
Chapter 24 What If They Don’t Reply?                 199
Chapter 25 Pick Up The Phone                         203
Chapter 26 Conversation To Opportunity               207

Part 9 Bonus Chapters                                211
Chapter 27 Pipeline Will Always Be King              213
Chapter 28 Ten Big LinkedIn & Sales Navigator Tips   219
Chapter 29 Social Selling Top Tips                   227
Chapter 30 Building A Strong LinkedIn Profile        231
Chapter 31 Cold Calling Is Like Blockbuster          237
Chapter 32 Social Selling In 15 Minutes Per Day      241
Chapter 33 The ABC’s Of Social Selling               245

Working with Daniel Disney                           251
Acknowledgements259
Recommended Reading                                  265
Index267




                                xiii
    FOREWORD BY CHRIS
         MURRAY


            Author of The Extremely Successful Salesman’s Club
                          and Selling with EASE


There are a couple of things I need to share with you about Daniel
Disney before we start.


First of all – with regards to ‘Social Selling’ – he really knows what
he’s talking about. Secondly – with regards to life in general – he is
one of the good guys.


And it’s because of those two points, that – in this world of snake-­oil
salespeople and faux business gurus who are happy to take punt-
ers’ hard-­earned cash in exchange for advice that sounds great but is
almost certainly destined to fail – Daniel Disney stands out from the
crowd and is definitely worth taking notice of.

                                    xv
                       Foreword by Chris Murray




The first time I met Daniel was at a large, national sales event. We
were both due to deliver our keynote speeches on the same day, and
I was in the organiser’s office, checking over a couple of things, when
this polite young man peered round the door and introduced him-
self.


Back then, The Daily Sales hadn’t been around too long – but even
so, he’d already managed to attract a following that numbered in the
hundreds of thousands.


Now, I’d seen people pay huge amounts of money to cultivate lists
like that before – so I asked him:


   “That’s an impressive audience. How much of it did you buy?”


To which, with a genuine look of shock, Daniel responded:


   “Buy an audience? I don’t think I’d know how to!”


That statement, made with the honest naiveté of someone who wasn’t
aware of how many “thought leaders” cheat their way to popularity,
told me everything I needed to know.


The man standing in front of me wasn’t buying attention – ­completely
the opposite – he was well on his way to mastering the art and ­science
of Customer Attraction.


                                  xvi
                       Foreword by Chris Murray




And when it comes to business development in the 21st century, cus-
tomer attraction was the secret ingredient that only a successful few
had worked out how to bake with.


What I didn’t realise back then was that there was something else in
the Daniel Disney recipe mix – he had started successfully combin-
ing Customer Attraction with effective Social Sales Interaction.


And shortly afterwards, that combination just exploded.


The thing is, because it all came so easily and naturally to him, ­Daniel
didn’t seem to realise how rare or magical those particular pieces of
business knowledge were – or why so many people found them dif-
ficult to implement.


To most people, it was like watching him pull a sword out of a stone –
which is a piece of cake if you’re the one who can do it but the deep-
est of mysteries if you can’t.


Thankfully, in this book – The Ultimate LinkedIn Messaging Guide –
Daniel shares that knowledge with us.


This is an incredibly powerful and generous piece of writing; he
takes us step-­by-­step through his system and then shares dozens of
templates and examples so that everyone who reads this can hit the
ground running as soon as they’ve finished it.


                                   xvii
                        Foreword by Chris Murray




You can dip in and out of this book if you need to, but there’s so
much you’ll miss out on if you do.


My best advice:


  Devour this book – page by page – and then go through it again and
  make notes. Focus on your current sales objectives and prospects and
  use the information Daniel shares to design a complete sales strategy
  from start to finish. Then, when you have a new sales challenge or a
  fresh set of prospective customers, come back and check it out again.


  Because every time you familiarise yourself with the wealth of infor-
  mation in his book – and the multiple applications of its content – you
  will be building a knowledge bank and sales toolbox that will give you
  a genuine advantage over a large majority of your competition.


To your success,

   Chris Murray




                                   xviii
      ABOUT THE AUTHOR



Daniel Disney is on a mission to help everyone leverage LinkedIn
to its full potential to grow their personal brands, grow their busi-
nesses, generate more leads and sell more.

What separates him from 99% of the LinkedIn experts and trainers
out there is that his background is in sales, not marketing.


Whilst he has learned how to generate a very large amount of con-
sistent, qualified inbound leads from LinkedIn, grow brands and
reach millions of people through content, his passion and focus have
always been, and will always be, selling.


Here are a few of his LinkedIn achievements:


-­100,000+ Personal LinkedIn Profile Followers
-­900,000+ LinkedIn Company Page Followers
                                 xix
                          About the Author




-­£25,000,000+ in Revenue from LinkedIn
-­400+ Articles Published on LinkedIn
-­150 Million+ Content Views Every Year
-­10,000+ New Followers Every Single Month
-­No.1 Most Influential Sales Expert on LinkedIn 2018, 2019, 2020,
   2021 & 2022


Not only has he achieved a lot on LinkedIn, but he continues to do
this every single day, even as you’re reading this book right now.


Daniel leverages LinkedIn and social selling to not only sell his
hugely popular LinkedIn training programmes and international
keynote talks, but he uses it to grow his business The Daily Sales
and their sponsorship packages. Daniel utilises everything that you
will read in this book to generate opportunities, grow relationships,
close sales and manage accounts selling advertising space and media
partnerships.


What you’ll read in this book are tried, tested, proven and mastered
techniques, strategies and tips for turning LinkedIn into a lead-­
generating and sales-­closing machine.


For more information on Daniel and what he offers, along with daily
social selling, LinkedIn, and sales tips, follow him on LinkedIn,
Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram, subscribe to his YouTube chan-
nel, and check out his website:


www.danieldisney.online
                                 xx
                           About the Author




THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN SALES GUIDE

How to Use Digital and Social Selling to Turn LinkedIn into a Lead,
Sales and Revenue Generating Machine.


BECOME A LINKEDIN POWER USER AND HARNESS THE POTENTIAL
OF SOCIAL SELLING

With the impact of COVID, remote working has become big—­and
so has the use of digital/virtual sales tools. More sales teams want and
need to understand how to use social media platforms like LinkedIn
to sell, and most do not use them properly. The Ultimate LinkedIn
Sales Guide is the go-­to book and guide for utilising LinkedIn to sell.
It covers all aspects of social and digital selling, including building
the ultimate LinkedIn profile, using the searching functions to find
customers, sending effective LinkedIn messages (written, audio &
video), creating great content that generates sales, and all the latest
tips and tricks, strategies and tools. With the right LinkedIn knowl-
edge, you can attract customers and generate leads, improving your
sales numbers from the comfort and safety of your computer.
                                  xxi
                           About the Author




No matter what you are selling, LinkedIn can connect you to buyers.
If you’re savvy, you can stay in touch with clients and generate more
repeat sales, build trust, and create engaging content that will spread
by word-­of-­mouth—­the most powerful sales strategy around. This
book will teach you how to do all that and more. In The Ultimate
LinkedIn Sales Guide, you will learn how to:


• Use the proven Four Pillars of Social Selling Success to improve
  your existing LinkedIn activities or get started on a firm footing.
• Create the Ultimate LinkedIn Profile, complete with a strong per-
  sonal brand that could catapult you to industry leader status.
• Generate leads using LinkedIn, then build and manage relation-
  ships with connected accounts to turn those leads into customers.
• Utilise little-­known LinkedIn “power tools” to grow your network,
  send effective messages, and write successful LinkedIn articles,
• And so much more!


The Ultimate LinkedIn Sales Guide is a must-­read for anyone wishing
to utilise LinkedIn to improve sales.




                                  xxii
             INTRODUCTION



When I wrote my first book, The Million-­Pound LinkedIn Message,
I shared my story of how one single message helped me create and
win a seven-­figure sale worth over £1,000,000. At the time, the world
of LinkedIn was a different place. There was only one way that you
could send messages, and that was by written text. The following
year, video messaging and audio voice note messaging launched and
since then, the way people communicate on LinkedIn has changed
dramatically.


Whilst written text-­based messages are still incredibly effective (when
done right), audio and video messages are now equally powerful.


There is also a fourth method of messaging that I didn’t cover in the
original book, and that’s InMail, a premium message that you send
to people you’re not connected with through platforms like LinkedIn


                                  xxiii
                             Introduction




Sales Navigator and LinkedIn Premium (which requires a monthly/
yearly fee).


Like all forms of messaging, many salespeople, businesses, recruit-
ers and LinkedIn users struggle to get replies and results from them.
There are a number of reasons for this, which I’ll cover in the book.
But when you figure it out—­when you start doing it right—­it’s then
you begin to crack the LinkedIn code and see just how powerful it is.


Over the last ten years, I’ve used (and continue to use) all forms of
messaging on LinkedIn, and to date, it has helped me close over
£25,000,000 in sales. Not only that, but these messaging strategies
and templates have helped companies and salespeople all over the
world to create and close so many more.


In this revised edition, I’m going to include the original book, but
I’m expanding it heavily to become the ultimate guide to LinkedIn
messaging, helping you, your teams and your businesses master
LinkedIn messaging to start more conversations, create more oppor-
tunities and, more importantly, drive more sales and revenue.


Not only does this book include real examples of successful messages,
but it also includes over 50 message templates and scripts for written,
audio, video and InMail messages. There are also QR codes through-
out the book that will take you through to recorded examples of video
and audio messages so you can see and hear them in full action.


                                  xxiv
                            Introduction




I WANT TO END THIS INTRODUCTION WITH ONE QUICK FACT
FOR YOU. . .

Some of your target prospects and ideal customers are waiting and
willing to talk to you; they need what you are selling, and they have
money to spend.


They won’t, however, respond to a spammy message. They might not
answer your call or read your email.


But send a good, well-­crafted message on LinkedIn. . .


Well, that might just be what catches their eye and prompts them to
talk to you.



PERSONALISED CONNECTION REQUESTS

To some extent, these count as messages, and if you send a person-
alised connection request with a note, that note becomes the first
message in your conversation history with the prospect.


So, when they go into their messages, your personalised connec-
tion request will appear as a message (if they accept your connection
request, that is).


NOW, THERE ARE A FEW THINGS TO CONSIDER. . .


                                 xxv
                             Introduction




Firstly, you SHOULD NOT personalise every request that you send
(which is why I’m including this as a small segment at the beginning
of this book).


Like a few other things in this book, this might counter what you’ve
heard, read or even been taught by other LinkedIn trainers.


The reason I know this to be fact and not opinion is two-­fold. 1.
I’ve heard from hundreds of people, including high-­level decision-­
makers, that they HATE it when they get a personalised connection
request on LinkedIn, and it often puts them off from accepting. 2.
Having sent thousands of connection requests over the years, the
majority have not been personalised and nearly always accepted.


There is a time when personalising your connection request is ben-
eficial. . .


This is when you’re trying to connect with people higher up in a com-
pany’s hierarchy—­Directors, C-­Level, Owners, etc. Senior business
leaders do everything they can to shield themselves from salespeople
(which traditionally involves having a PA or assistant to manage their
phone calls). On LinkedIn, they have full control and are sometimes
hesitant to connect with every salesperson who sends a request (as
many then receive a spammy sales pitch straight after accepting!).


This is why adding a note is important for these decision-­makers
because they will need a reason to accept your request.

                                 xxvi
                             Introduction




BONUS TIP: If you’re trying to connect with someone very high up
in a company, I recommend connecting first with other people in
the business. As a potential second step, you could also engage on
some of their and their company’s LinkedIn page posts. This makes
you visible, and when you send the decision-­maker a connection
request, they’ll see that you’re already connected with several people
at the company, making you seem warmer.


For many other people that you want to connect with, I’d recom-
mend not adding a note and simply sending the request as it is.


AFTER THEY ACCEPT. . .


For the ones that you do send a personalised connection request, if
they do accept, which hopefully they will, you’re then faced with a
tricky situation. Most people (9 out of 10) won’t reply to your per-
sonalised note, which is now technically the first message of the con-
versation! So, you will need to send another message, even though
this will feel more like the first message that you sent.


For this situation, I personally recommend that the message you
send is either audio or video (you’ll learn all about those in this
book) so that you’re not following a written message with another
written message.




                                 xxvii
          PART 1
PROSPECTING WITH MESSAGES




            1
                      CHAPTER 1

              MOTIVATION
              TO MESSAGE




I
  f there is one thing that I have experienced consistently with
  messaging on LinkedIn during my time as a sales leader and
over the last seven years training companies and sales teams across
the world, it’s that a lot of people are scared to send messages to
other people.


Either that or they’re simply not sending enough messages. I learned
a big lesson very early in my sales career when I was knocking on
people’s doors, trying to sell TV services. Some days I would have to
knock on over 100 doors to try and hit my target for the day. Now,
most of those doors didn’t answer, and out of those that did, a lot

                                  3
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




of them slammed the door in my face (some even swearing as they
slammed it).


But there would always be at least one person that would answer,
listen and then would express an interest. They actually needed the
product I was selling, and I was able to help them.


This was where my love of sales was born and where my motiva-
tion grew to find people that I could help. What I realised was that
there were always people out there who needed whatever product or
service I was selling—­my job was to find them.


When it comes to messaging, my mantra, and what I’ve taught sales-
people all over the world, is:


   “There are people out there who NEED and WANT what you
   sell. They’re waiting for you to get in touch with them and show
   them how you can help them. It all starts with a message.”


   “Each message to a prospect could be the message that leads you
   to your NEXT big sale.”


   “The worst that can happen is that they’re not interested right
   now—­the best that can happen is that they are.”




                                   4
                        Motivation To Message




To everyone reading this book, my hope is that it not only shows you
how to send super-effective messages on LinkedIn, but also moti-
vates you to send more. Reaching out to more prospects, starting
more conversations, and by doing so, helping you, your teams and
your companies sell more.


If you believe you can help someone with your product or service,
message them.


Don’t wait around.


Don’t wait for your competitors to message them first.


Don’t wait for them to come to you when they’re ready.


They might need what you sell without realising it. Message them,
start the conversation and show them that you can help.




                                  5
                      CHAPTER 2

      THE PROSPECTING
           MAZE




N
    ot that long ago, salespeople only had a few methods to contact
    prospects and customers. They could pick up the phone and call
them, send them a letter, perhaps even send them a fax or see them
face to face.


As time has gone on, technology has advanced, and we now live in a
time where there have never been more platforms for communication.


Suddenly, we have text, email, social media, video and more. As sales-
people we must realise that our prospects are all using these different


                                   7
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




methods, and we now have more chances than ever to reach them.
What an exciting time to be working in sales, right?!

Never before has a salesperson had SO MANY selling tools avail-
able. Yes, it means we have more to learn and master, but it creates so
many more opportunities to sell.

Due to the variety of available communication platforms, we all
might prefer to use different ones. Some people prefer the phone,
some prefer social media and some prefer email.




FIGURE 1.1   The Prospecting Maze

                                    8
                         The Prospecting Maze




There’s no right or wrong here, just individual choice. And this is the
reality of prospecting, of modern-­day digital prospecting. It involves
multiple channels, multiple platforms and tools, but what that cre-
ates is multiple opportunities to reach and engage your prospects
and customers.


I think one of the best ways to illustrate it is to use a finger maze
puzzle. . .


You might have seen one of these maze puzzles before. Several
doors go into the maze, but only one will lead to the end in the mid-
dle. You follow different paths with your finger or a pen to try and
get it right.


Now, in our modern-­day world, each of our prospects and custom-
ers sits in their own little maze. Even you, the reader, as a consumer
and buyer, will sit in your own little maze.


Each door into the maze represents a method of communication.
One door represents the phone or cold calling, one door represents
email, one social media, one face-­to-­face—­you get the idea. As we
all know with these puzzles, only one (or two) doors will lead to the
middle, and in the modern-­day prospecting maze, often only one or
two doors will lead you to the prospect (Figure 1.1).


And this is what I call the modern-­day prospecting maze!


Now this is the important part. . .
                                      9
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




EVERYONE IS DIFFERENT! Each maze around each individual
prospect is different. For some prospects, the door that gets you to
the prospect in the middle is the phone. For some prospects, the
door that gets you to the prospect in the middle is via email. For
some, it will be social media.


And this is the crucial reality for sellers today. We have never had as
many communication tools, and they will probably only continue to
grow. Thirty years ago, the prospecting maze consisted of far fewer
doors, making it a lot simpler to reach prospects. It was also easier
for prospects to ignore us.


There are many more doors now, which, on the one hand, makes it
more complicated but, on the other hand, means as a salesperson,
you’ve got MORE opportunities to reach prospects.


Let me give you an example. . .


Let’s say that I am a prospect, and you are trying to sell to me (which
many people have done over the years and continue to do on a
daily basis).


If you were to go through the cold calling door in my prospecting
maze (in other words, use cold calling to try and sell to me), you
would end up at a dead end.




                                  10
                         The Prospecting Maze




Personally, I don’t answer cold calls, even though I’ve spent years
making them and years training and leading salespeople making
them. As a buyer, it’s not a method that I personally respond to. It
doesn’t matter how many times you try to call me; I won’t answer.

I’m not alone with this; there are many people around the world,
likely including many of YOUR prospects, who don’t and will never
answer cold calls.

The reason this point is so important is that there are still many com-
panies out there where their ONLY prospecting method is cold call-
ing. There are also companies where cold calling is the core method
alongside email. If this is you or your company, you’re missing out
on all of the prospects you could reach and sell to if you were to use
other methods, such as LinkedIn and Social Selling.

As a salesperson, if you REALLY want to sell to me, let’s say I am a
huge prospect for you and one that you are confident you can help,
you need to do something different.

Perhaps you’ll connect with me via email, or perhaps you’ll see me
at an event, but what will increase your chances is to connect and
engage with me via LinkedIn.

This is the reality of sales. If you’re restricting yourself to just one
or two methods, you’re simply limiting yourself. Some of your




                                   11
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




prospects will NEVER answer a cold call. Some will NEVER reply
to your email. Some will ONLY talk to you if you engage with them
effectively via LinkedIn or social media.


 NOTE: I’m not saying one is better than the other—­I want this message to be clear.


To reach the maximum number of prospects, you need to use ALL of
the available tools. Some prospects will only ever talk to you via the
phone. However, it’s important to appreciate that there is a percent-
age of your prospects that prefer digital communication.


In this book, I will show you one of the many ways you can lever-
age LinkedIn and social media for selling. LinkedIn messages are a
tremendously powerful tool when used right—­trust me, I’ve created
and closed loads of B2B deals through LinkedIn messages.


The “Modern Day Prospecting Maze” is there to help you under-
stand the prospecting landscape that is out there now.


The most effective sellers use as many of the available doors as pos-
sible to increase their chances of reaching the prospect in the middle.

   “If you sit around and wait for customers to come to you, you risk
   losing them to your competitors who don’t sit and wait. They make
   contact first.”




                                         12
                       CHAPTER 3

     OUTBOUND SOCIAL
         SELLING




O   ver the last few years, I’ve noticed one thing. . .


A lot, and I mean A LOT, of salespeople, sales leaders, and even sales
experts only think of social selling as an INBOUND-­generating
activity. They see it as sharing content to generate inbound leads.


Whilst it is, of course, a very powerful inbound lead-­generating plat-
form, it is equally a very powerful OUTBOUND-­lead-­generating
platform.


                                   13
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




For those who may not be familiar with these terms, inbound leads
are leads that come into you. For example, someone visits your
LinkedIn profile or reads content that you’ve shared and then sends
YOU a message enquiring about your product or service. That is
seen as an inbound lead.


Inbound leads are more commonly generated by marketing depart-
ments, where they are then sometimes qualified and passed on to the
sales department.


Outbound leads are more commonly generated by salespeople via
prospecting activities where they go out and generate the opportu-
nity. For example, cold calling will find salespeople phone up totally
cold prospects and work to turn them into sales opportunities. They
have gone out and created an opportunity from nothing.


Right now, one of the biggest missed opportunities in sales is gener-
ating more outbound social selling opportunities.


Let me show you what I mean. . .


Say you’re a B2B sales rep, and as part of a social selling push, you
write an article on LinkedIn. After that article goes out and gets some
good engagement, a nice little message pops up in your LinkedIn
message inbox from a prospect saying they liked your blog and
would like more information or the opportunity to discuss the prod-
uct or service you sell.

                                   14
                        Outbound Social Selling




That would be an inbound lead.


I don’t think many people out there would disagree with me here.


This is where the argument is often based that social selling is in fact
not selling but social marketing.


Based on that example alone, I would agree.


If you’re creating content and then waiting for inbound leads to come
in, that is simply a marketing activity.


Now let’s say you wrote and published that article on LinkedIn. Per-
haps you had a few inbound enquiries come through, which is great.


But let’s say that you then decided to look at the engagement—­the
likes, comments and shares.


Whilst sifting through those engagements, you notice that some-
one who works within one of your prospect companies had actually
clicked ‘like’ on your blog.


If you then connect with them and send them a message to start
a conversation, this is where OUTBOUND social selling comes in.
This is where you are starting the conversation, not waiting for them
to start it.

                                    15
                      THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




I’ll share a real example of this:


Many years ago, whilst selling in the IT industry and trying to reach
IT Managers/IT Directors, there was one company in particular that
I was struggling to get through to.


They were a medium-­sized business, around 200+ staff, and I could
not get through to the decision-­maker via cold calling or email. I had
been trying to reach them for around two months.


One day, I published an article on LinkedIn. It wasn’t an article based on
the IT industry, so it wasn’t aimed at my target prospects. Instead, it was
an article on sales, the subject I knew I could more effectively write about.
When looking at the engagement, I noticed that a sales rep from within
the company I was trying to prospect had clicked ‘like’ on my blog.


  TOP TIP: When you create and share content on LinkedIn, whether it’s a blog, post,
  video, photo, etc., you can’t see the people who “view” the content. You could get
  1,000 views, but you’ll never be able to see who they are.

  When they engage with the content, such as clicking “like,” commenting or sharing
  the content, THAT’S when you can actually see them.

  Once you can see them, you can then connect with them and use it to start a conver-
  sation. This is why I encourage everyone to create content on LinkedIn with the goal of
  generating sales and clients to drive as much engagement to their content as possible.

 It’s only through the engagement that you can actually see who is engaging and start
 talking to them.


                                            16
                          Outbound Social Selling




After realising that this sales rep had clicked “like,” I knew I had an
opportunity to find a different route to my target decision-­maker.


I connected with the sales rep and sent them a nice, simple conver-
sational message (which you’ll also find in the template chapter later
on in this book):


  Hi John,


  Thank you for clicking like on my article! I hope you enjoyed it; I’d love
  to know what your thoughts were on the subject?


  Kind regards,
  Dan


They replied straight away, and we started chatting. I didn’t jump in
trying to pitch them, nor did I jump in straight away asking for the
phone number of their IT Director. Instead, I talked to them about
the subject of the article that they liked.


We sent a few messages back and forth, building a nice bit of rapport,
where I had then earned the opportunity to discuss what I was selling.


I then mentioned that I had actually been trying to reach their IT
Director to discuss what I was selling. They were more than happy
to make an introduction and actually went on to arrange a phone call
for me with them.

                                      17
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




After that phone call, I was then able to progress it into a meeting
and eventually go on to win that sale.


I would argue very strongly that it is outbound selling. It’s no differ-
ent from cold calling someone; you are sending someone a message
who doesn’t necessarily know you with the aim of creating a sales
opportunity.


Just like a cold call, some won’t reply/answer, and some will. The
ones who do reply can then be groomed, turning into real sales
opportunities.


It’s time to start using social selling for both inbound AND out-
bound selling!


In my experience, most salespeople are either sending terrible sales
pitch messages OR just not using social media in any way to generate
outbound opportunities.


LinkedIn messaging is one of the most powerful ways you can
leverage Social Selling. I believe it is absolutely no different from
cold calling.


In many ways, it can be a much warmer version, with the opportu-
nity for already having connected with them, built credibility and
trust, and started building rapport.


                                   18
          PART 2
RESEARCH & PERSONALISATION




            19
                     CHAPTER 4

  WHY AREN’T PEOPLE
      REPLYING?




Y
   ou’ve found your prospect on LinkedIn and sent them a well-­
   crafted LinkedIn message, but then something unexpected
happens. . .

They don’t reply.

Come to think of it, not many of your prospects are replying to your
LinkedIn messages. . . What’s going on?!

Let me share with you the three most likely reasons people aren’t
replying to your LinkedIn messages (and what you can do to get
them to reply):
                                 21
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




NUMBER 1 – YOU DIDN’T PERSONALISE THE MESSAGE!

The number of messages that I get (and have seen decision-­makers
get) have ZERO personalisation. . . On occasion, they might add
your name in, but that’s about it.


If the message is more about YOU than it is about them, you’re
unlikely to get a reply. One of the easiest and quickest changes you
can make to your social selling process is to make more of your mes-
saging about THEM.

• Not about your company but about theirs
• Not about your product but what it will do for them
• Not about you but about them

Before you write your message, do your homework. Look through
their LinkedIn profile, search through their recent LinkedIn activity,
look at their company’s page on LinkedIn, and if you’re still strug-
gling to find good usable information, look at other people working
at their company; there is always someone sharing good insights.



NUMBER 2 – THEY HAVE NO IDEA WHO YOU ARE!

A lot of LinkedIn messages go unanswered because they’re just too
cold. The prospect is looking at this message thinking. . .


The beauty of LinkedIn and social selling is that your messages don’t
actually need to be cold, and there are a few things you can do before

                                  22
                       Why Aren’t People Replying?




messaging (that will only take a few days) to warm them up, increas-
ing the response rate.


Step One: Engage on a few of the posts that they’re sharing on LinkedIn.
   Click ‘like’ and then write a nice CONTRIBUTING comment. This
   does not mean a “Great post, Sarah!” comment but something more
   tangible like, “Really enjoyed this post, Sarah. A similar thing actu-
   ally happened to me a few years back. . .” A good comment may
   even get a reply from them and beginning a conversation.
Step Two: Connect with other people in the company and engage on
   their posts as well. The decision-­maker will likely notice this, fur-
   ther warming up their relationship with you (before you’ve even
   spoken directly).
Step Three: Share your own content during this time as well so they’re
   getting value from you and getting to know you. Make sure the content
   is industry-­relevant and valuable to them to make the right impact.



NUMBER 3 – YOU’RE ONLY SENDING TEXT-­BASED MESSAGES

As of this writing, I would say around 99% of the messages in my
LinkedIn inbox are text-­based written messages. From the conversa-
tions I have with leaders all over the world, it’s the same for them.
This means that if you’re only sending written messages, it’s just
another written message in a huge pile of other written messages. . .


If you want to stand out, capture their attention and increase your
chances of a reply, it might be time to get more creative.

                                   23
                   THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Utilise the two other ways that you can send messages on LinkedIn
right now, audio voice notes and video messages. Not only do they
stand out because so few are using them, but they allow you to take
your message to the next level, adding in voice/tone and even body
language/eye contact.


Audio/Voice Notes – Keep it short and sweet, around 30–60 seconds.
  Make it as much about them as possible and have a simple CTA
  (call to action) for their response.
Video Messages – You can send a maximum of two minutes, although
  60–90 seconds is optimal. Look at the camera for good eye contact
  and be aware of lighting, what you’re wearing and what’s behind
  you in the camera shot.


There it is. . .


Three of the most common reasons why your prospects are likely
not replying to your LinkedIn messages. Hopefully some of these
tips will help you generate more replies, and from those replies, more
pipeline and sales!

    “The more you make your message about them, the more likely they
    will be to reply to you.”




                                    24
                      CHAPTER 5

     RESEARCH,
  PERSONALISATION &
     RELEVANCE




T
    here’s an essential formula that I teach when it comes to
    ­messaging on LinkedIn, and it’s this:


R + P X R = REPLIES

         Research   Personalisation Relevance      Replies

When I scroll through my LinkedIn inbox, looking at the messages I
get from salespeople trying to sell me something, there is one thing
that most of them have in common:
                                 25
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




  Nothing in the message is about me, the prospect.


It’s all about them. Who THEY are, what THEY are selling, what
THEIR company does, what THEIR product does, etc. This spray-­
and-­pray approach doesn’t work (I’m not sure if or when it ever did);
ultimately, it is lazy selling. Create a template, copy and paste it, and
send it to as many people as possible to see if someone bites. It’s lazy,
and not only does it rarely (if ever) yield results, but you also run the
risk of giving potential prospects an incredibly poor first impres-
sion of you.


This is why personalisation is so important and why good research
is crucial to find the information you need to personalise the mes-
sage properly.


It’s no longer enough to scrape their name, position and company
name from LinkedIn. You need to dig deeper. The deeper you dig,
and the more relevant you make the message, the more impact it
will have.


How much research should I do? How LONG should I spend
researching someone?


This is very important:


  The amount of time that you spend researching a prospect should be
  reflective of the potential value of their business for you.

                                       26
                 Research, Personalisation & Relevance




The bigger the potential value of the sale, the more research you
should do. If it’s a small, low-­value opportunity, then you shouldn’t
spend as much time on it. You don’t want to waste time extensively
researching one individual prospect that becomes a low-­value sale
and holds you up from the time you should have been spending
prospecting to more people.



WHERE TO RESEARCH?

This is the exciting part—­LinkedIn is literally a GOLD MINE of
information. You can look at it like layers that you dig through, and
the deeper you dig, the more valuable the prospect is potentially.
Here are the layers/different places you can research prospects:



LAYER 1 – BASIC RESEARCHING

LinkedIn Profile & LinkedIn Activity


The first step is to read through their LinkedIn profile. Look at the
summary section, look at their employment history, look at who has
given them recommendations, look at what pages and groups they
follow. There is a lot of information that can be used just from their
LinkedIn profile.


You can then go into their LinkedIn activity. You can look at all the
content they have posted. If they’re actively posting content, this
is a great opportunity to engage on the post (click ‘like’ and add a

                                  27
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




comment) and then use the post to start a conversation (there are
templates for this later in the chapter). You can also see the content
that THEY are engaging on (liking and commenting). This can give
you insights into subjects and topics they’re interested in and indus-
try influencers they might follow and respond to. You can also see
any articles they have written and published as well as any PDF car-
ousels or slideshows that they’ve shared.


LAYER 2 – DEEPER RESEARCH

LinkedIn Company Page & Activity


To go a level deeper, you can then go to their LinkedIn company
page, which will include some basic information and usually a link
through to their website.


What you’ll also be able to see and look through is their company’s
LinkedIn activity and all the content that they have been posting.
This can be full of insights and information that are worth using,
such as company announcements.


LAYER 3 – ADVANCED RESEARCH

Other Employees’ Profiles & Activity


The final layer can often contain the largest quantity of informa-
tion and also present multiple alternative routes into the company.

                                  28
                 Research, Personalisation & Relevance




When you’re on their LinkedIn company’s page, you’ll be able to see
a list of all the employees’ profiles at that company.


This will include other decision-­makers as well as people within their
own team and other teams in the business. Some of these people might
have more relevant and valuable information in their profile and
through their activity. Some of them will be more active, posting more
content and, therefore, giving you more insight into the company.


If you’re selling to a CMO, for example, looking through the rest
of the marketing team can be valuable. If you’re struggling to get a
response from the CMO, sending a message to the marketing man-
ager, supervisor or anyone else on the team can sometimes get you a
foot in the door.


Then there are other departments that you can tap into. I can’t count
the number of times I’ve made contact with the sales department of
a company where I was ultimately trying to sell to the CTO.


WHAT TO RESEARCH

The next question is: What are you looking for? What information is
actually going to be valuable in the message?


If your personalisation isn’t authentic, it won’t work. You can spend
hours researching someone, but if you then present it in a sales-­y
way, it won’t work.

                                  29
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




The key is to look for CONVERSATION STARTING opportunities.
You’ll find a lot of these throughout the templates included in this
book, but here are some to give you an idea:


Their Company – Have you worked with them before? Are you
  working with a similar company? Do you know someone who
  works there?
Their Summary – What have they done before that you might have
  a connection or experience with? What do they do now that you
  have a connection with?
Their Activity – What have they done recently? What has their
  company done recently? What are they interested in or pas-
  sionate about?
The CEO – What are they sharing on LinkedIn? What information is
  on their profile? What announcements have they made recently?
Their Colleagues – Who is the most active on LinkedIn? What are
  they sharing? What insights do they have?


   “In sales, there is a fine balance between persistence and pestering.
   The best salespeople know how to be persistent without pestering
   their prospects.”




                                     30
                      CHAPTER 6

           THE ONE THING
             TO AVOID




R
     ecently, a salesperson asked for my help on a particular prospect
     they were pursuing. They had tried “everything” and couldn’t
get a response from this prospect.


To try and figure out what might be blocking this potential opportu-
nity, I asked them to show me their LinkedIn inbox and the message
they had sent.


What I saw shocked me. . .




                                  31
                   THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




It wasn’t the first time I’d seen this happen, but it was one of the worst
cases I’d ever witnessed. It was the ONE thing you must try to avoid
when sending messages on LinkedIn.


Let me just set the scene so you can understand why this was such a
big problem:

  You must have seen that scene in a film or series where there is a crazy
  significant other who is perhaps a little too keen.


Their partner gets home and checks their house phone expecting
1 or 2 voicemails. This is where it usually states:


    “You have. . . 100 messages.”


They might go something like this:


    “Hey, Chris, it’s Sarah here. I had a great time yesterday. Call me
    when you get home.”


    “Hey, Chris, Sarah again. Just thought I’d check if you were home
    yet. Call me.”


    “Just making sure you’re okay, Chris. Call me as soon as you
    get this.”


    “Did you just try and call? My phone went off, but I didn’t see
    who it was. Call me.”

                                     32
                         The ONE Thing To Avoid




   “Did I do something wrong, Chris? Why are you ignoring me?”


   “I’m sorry for the last message. I’m just worried about
   you. Call me.”


   You’re probably getting where I’m going with this, but it’s hap-
   pening in sales, and it’s happening on LinkedIn. Message trails
   that look something like this:


   “Hi, Jane, my name is Daniel, and I work for Software King.
   Our product does lots of amazing things, and we are a really
   amazing company. I’d love to chat and see how we could work
   together. Here is a link to my calendar so you can book a meet-
   ing with me.”


   “Hey, Jane. Just wanted to see if you’d received my last message?”


   “Hi, Jane. Here’s a testimonial from one of our customers! Are
   you free tomorrow for a chat?”


   “Jane, not sure if you’re getting my messages. Could you let me
   know if you can see these?”


It’s crazy to think people do this and think it will work, but they do.
Going back to the salesperson I was telling you about, well. . . They
had sent EIGHT MESSAGES to a prospect with zero replies. Each
message got worse and worse.
                                   33
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Imagine if a salesperson messaged YOU eight times trying to sell to
you. Would you reply? Probably not.


And so, this is the ONE thing to avoid above all others. . .


If you’ve sent a message and they haven’t replied, don’t try the same
type of message again. Don’t worry if you’ve already done this, by the
way. It’s never too late to turn it around.


   “Okay, Dan, we get that this probably doesn’t look great and won’t
   work, but then what is it that we COULD do instead?”


Let’s say you’ve sent a written prospecting message to someone and
they haven’t replied. I’d encourage you to first wait 5–7 days for a
reply, and if nothing comes back, then your next step should be to
try a DIFFERENT TYPE of message. If your first message was a text-­
based written message, then your best options to follow up are either
an AUDIO or VIDEO message.


Not only is this a pattern interruption to what they’ll be used to,
but you also increase your chance of getting a response by utilising
different forms of communication. Plus, it will look a lot better com-
pared to multiple written messages.




                                  34
                          The ONE Thing To Avoid




When you send an audio message, it shows up as a volume bar with a
play button, and when you send a video, it shows up as an image with
a play button, so they’ll all look completely different.

   “No one wakes up in the morning and hopes that they receive a ter-
   rible, spammy, non-­personalised sales pitch message in their inbox.”




                                     35
                     CHAPTER 7

   NO ONE LIKES SPAM
       MESSAGES




T   HIS IS VERY IMPORTANT! PLEASE READ!


In this book, I’m going to show you how one single LinkedIn mes-
sage opened the door to a sale worth over £1,000,000.


What I need you to know and remember is that this was a 100% per-
sonal and individual message, not a spam one sent out to hundreds
or thousands of prospects. This message template, and the others
included in this book, will work best if you send them to qualified
prospects on an individual basis.

                                37
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Spam selling really isn’t a strong strategy in sales anymore. Cop-
ying and pasting generic messages and sending them to all of
your connections on LinkedIn will struggle to yield a positive
response. What does work is sending personalised messages to
relevant people.


NO ONE LIKES SPAM!


I’m sure you don’t like receiving spam messages. I bet even the people
SENDING the spam messages don’t like receiving them!


Yet I would bet that 80–90% of the LinkedIn messages sent right now
are considered spammy messages. (Spammy messages are sales mes-
sages sent to prospects who don’t need or want your product or ser-
vice, often in an aggressive or sleazy sales style.)


Please, when reading this book and using these templates, make
sure you understand that I only ever approach prospects with these
message templates that I have qualified myself and am confident
I can help.


Not only will you save time from sending hundreds of wasted mes-
sages, but you’ll also increase your chances of conversion and success.


Let me share with you some of the messages that I get on a regular
basis in my LinkedIn inbox! I won’t share who they are from—­that
would just be mean!
                                  38
                       No One Likes Spam Messages




EXAMPLES

My inbox is filled with LinkedIn messages daily, and unfortu-
nately, 80% of them are terrible (another motivation behind writing
this book!).


But if you read these and know deep down that you’ve sent similar
ones, hopefully this will be an eye-­opener. . .


The WAY TOO LONG Message

I had to cut this up into three sections to be able to fit it into one sin-
gle slide; it was WAY too long! You can tell it’s been copied and pasted
from an email, which is not a strategy I would ever recommend.


LinkedIn messaging is more of an instant messaging platform than
an email platform. It’s designed for short, conversational messages.
You’ll see as you read through this book that these light, conversation-­
starting messages work so much better than copy-­and-­pasted emails
like Figure 7.1.


Keep them short, keep them valuable and keep them conversational.


However, they can get a little too short sometimes. . .


So, whilst this example was of a message that was way too long, here are a
couple of examples of messages that I’ve received that are way too short:


                                    39
                   THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




FIGURE 7.1 The Way Too Long Message




                                      40
                      No One Likes Spam Messages




The Way Too Short Message

I also get messages that simply just say, “Hi!” Again, not a strategy I
recommend if you actually want to generate results from LinkedIn
and Social Selling. In fact, I don’t think I even send my friends mes-
sages like this, let alone prospects or customers.


Whilst LinkedIn messaging is a more instant-­message conversational
style platform, the Figure 7.2 example is perhaps a little too extreme.


There are a few other examples of messages that are perhaps a little
too chatty or too needy. . .


I must add that I don’t know any of these people, have never spo-
ken with them, and that this is their first communication with me. It
was their approach to starting a conversation with me, and, unfortu-
nately, not a successful attempt.


These examples were my motivation to write this book. My inbox
(like many others out there) is filled DAILY with messages like these
or very sales-­driven messages.


Unfortunately, the majority of sales-­driven messages are selling
a product that I have no need for at all. Worst yet, the salesperson
sending them could have found that out had they spent just one
minute looking at my LinkedIn profile.



                                  41
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




FIGURE 7.2   The Way Too Short Message




                                         42
                      No One Likes Spam Messages




There is one more bad message style that is currently one of the
worst out there. . .


I believe it’s a style that has unfortunately been taught by some of the
other LinkedIn/Social Selling experts, but it is one that is hated by
decision-­makers and one that I find quite shocking.


It gives the impression that you value YOUR time above theirs, which
isn’t something I would personally recommend. . .


The “Here’s MY Calendar Link” Message

This is the “Here is MY calendar link for YOU to book a meeting
with me” message. It’s one of the most ego-­driven examples of selling
I’ve seen in modern-­day sales. It’s very much like the cheesy, sleazy
salespeople of the past (Figure 7.3).


It suggests that your time is more valuable and important than the
time of your prospects, which isn’t a great way to present yourself
when trying to win business.


Don’t get me wrong; online calendars are great! They’re super-­
efficient and effective in booking meetings with prospects and
customers.


As a salesperson, you need to EARN the right to a conversation,
demo or meeting.

                                   43
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




FIGURE 7.3   The Calendar Link




                                     44
                     No One Likes Spam Messages




After you’ve given value, built a relationship and qualified them as
a prospect, then is the time to ask THEM if they would be happy to
arrange a phone call or face-­to-­face meeting.


If they are happy, then you can send them a link to your calendar.
Even then, though, I still recommend asking them what dates/times
work best for them. The sheer act of sending them your calendar
link places value on your own time above them.


Only if you’ve gone back and forth a few times and are struggling to
find a date that works for both of you does the online calendar link
truly provide value in sales.


TO PITCH OR NOT TO PITCH?

That is the question—­and a big question when it comes to messag-
ing on LinkedIn. There is a lot of negative content around sending
pitches on LinkedIn, BUT there are actually two types of LinkedIn
pitch messages, and one of them actually works.


You see, the problem is that most people, when sending sales pitch–
style messages on LinkedIn, send non-­personalised spammy pitches.
Those definitely don’t work. Ever. However, there is a type of pitch
message that does work, which I’ll share here and which you’ll see in
some of the templates in this book.




                                 45
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




The first question you have when sending a message on LinkedIn is
whether you should start a conversation or send a sales pitch. There
are a few variables that will impact your answer when choosing
which to use for a prospective customer:


1) How senior they are in the company
2) How active they are on LinkedIn
3) What size the potential opportunity might be
4) What size the company is


Let’s just accept something for a minute that is counterintuitive to
99% of the content you see on LinkedIn right now. . .


Some people actually PREFER getting pitched on LinkedIn.
True story.


Why? Because they don’t want the “fake” dance salespeople often do
when they’re only looking to sell something. They just want you to
tell them what you think you can do for them, and if it’s something
they see value in, they’ll entertain it.


In my personal experience, I’ve found this to be more the case with
senior decision-­makers, C-­Level execs, VPs, owners, founders, etc.
These are some of the busiest people you’ll sell to, and you’ll be far
more successful getting to the point than trying to lure them into
a fluffy conversation they simply don’t have time for. It’s often the


                                  46
                     No One Likes Spam Messages




same with people who aren’t very active on LinkedIn, are not posting
or engaging a lot, and often with networks below 1,000 connections/
followers.


The KEY, and something you’ll see throughout this book, is when
you use a straight-­to-­pitch approach, make the pitch about THEM
and not about you. It’s not about you and your product, it’s about
their problems and your solution. It’s about how THEY will benefit
and what they gain from the opportunity.


On the flipside, you then have people that DO want the conversa-
tion. They don’t want you to just jump in with the pitch; they would
much rather get to know you first and build some level of rapport.


People in mid-­management and below, those who are much more
active on LinkedIn, and those with larger audiences tend to be more
responsive to conversation-­starting messages.




                                 47
           PART 3
LINKEDIN MESSAGING THOUGHTS




             49
                           CHAPTER 8

           INMAIL VERSUS
             MESSAGE




F    or those of you who aren’t sure of the difference between a
     LinkedIn InMail and a LinkedIn message, allow me to clarify
it for you.


A LinkedIn message is a message you send to a direct connection
on LinkedIn. Someone who you have connected with, they have
accepted, and they are now a 1st-­degree connection.

 NOTE: If you are only “Following” them on LinkedIn, whilst you will be able to see
 their activity, you will not be able to message them directly. This is only possible
 when you are connected with someone.


                                         51
                THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




A LinkedIn InMail is a message sent to someone that you are NOT
connected with. You can only send these with LinkedIn Premium or
LinkedIn Sales Navigator.


My recommendation has been and always will be to try and connect
with a prospect first and then send them a LinkedIn message. The
conversion and success rates are incredibly higher with LinkedIn
messages compared to InMails.


THAT BEING SAID. . .


Some people won’t accept your connection request. It doesn’t matter
how great your personal brand might be or your personalised con-
nection request, some prospects and decision-­makers simply won’t
accept. In those instances, InMail is one of your only options and,
when done right, can still prove to be very effective.


If you can, try to connect with your prospect or target customer
first and then send a LinkedIn message. If after 7–14 days they
haven’t accepted your connection request, then look at utilising
InMail instead.


If you are a Sales Navigator user, you’ll benefit from Chapter 21,
“InMail Messages on LinkedIn,” where I go through all of the




                                 52
                             INMAIL VERSUS Message




processes and strategies, along with templates, to help you turn your
InMails into opportunities.

   “There is no one-­size-­fits-­all in sales. Different prospects respond to
   different approaches. Your role as a sales professional is to adapt to
   each potential customer.”




                                        53
                       CHAPTER 9

  WHEN TO SEND A
MESSAGE ON LINKEDIN




T
   iming is very important when it comes to sending messages
   on LinkedIn; we’ve all seen the memes showing someone dis-
appointed with the text, “That moment you accept a connection
request and then instantly get hit with a sales pitch.”


Some call it spray and pray.
Some call it spamming.
Some call it pitch slapping.


It actually can get worse than that. . .


                                    55
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Some people now connect and then send a really nice, well-­written
and personalised message. “What’s wrong with that, Dan?” I hear
you ask. . .


Well, this is what usually happens:


Salesperson:     “Hi, Dan, I really loved your post last week. Thank
                 you for connecting. Was the sales manager you
                 mentioned really that bad?”
Me:              “Ah, thank you. I’m glad you like the post. Yes, they
                 really were. It’s scary to think there are managers
                 out there like that.”
Salesperson:     “Yes, I agree. By the way, I saw you’re the CEO of
                 The Daily Sales, and I wondered if you were free
                 tomorrow to discuss a new email platform for your
                 business?”


Insert Ron Burgandy saying, “Well, that escalated quickly” (an
Anchorman reference for anyone who didn’t get it).


So, when I say timing is important, it’s really important.


There are a few factors that will determine the best time to message
a prospect. Some prospects are best messaged quite soon after con-
necting, such as C-­Level, VPs and senior leadership roles. They are
often too busy to do the social selling “dance” of engagement and
content sharing and often prefer that you just message them with

                                  56
                 WHEN TO SEND A MESSAGE ON LINKEDIN




what you offer. There are several templates in this book that show
you the right way to do this.


Then you get mid-­level management positions and lower; they
usually are more responsive when you take a little time. Do more
research and do some social engagement beforehand.


Here are my recommended timings:


Senior Leadership & C-­Level: 1–2 days after connecting
Mid-­Level Management: 3–4 days after connecting (and after
  engagement)
Large/Enterprise Accounts: 1–2 weeks after connecting (and after
  extensive research and account mapping)




                                 57
                      CHAPTER 10

ONE SIZE DOESN’T FIT
        ALL




B
    efore we dig into the multi-­million message, I need you to under-
    stand that one size doesn’t fit all.


This is the same for cold calls, for sales emails, and for face-­to-­face
meetings. If you take one approach and apply it to every prospect
you try and sell to, you’ll rarely succeed.


Each of your prospects is an individual, different in their own unique
ways. One of the most important skills a salesperson can possess is
the ability to adapt and mirror their prospects and customers. This is


                                   59
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




the same rule with Social Selling; it’s important to treat each prospect
as an individual.


Sales work best when you stop trying to sell to anyone and everyone
and start selling to the people who actually need what you sell.


Whilst the core message in The Ultimate LinkedIn Messaging Guide
may have unlocked a huge sale for me, it doesn’t mean you can copy
it, paste it, send it to every single one of your prospects and expect
the sales will start flooding in!


Different prospects, different products and different industries will
all play a role in the type of messaging you want to use on LinkedIn.


Therefore, I didn’t just want to share the multi-­million message with
you; I wanted to provide you with as many proven LinkedIn message
templates as possible.


After I take you through the story of the multi-­million LinkedIn mes-
sage, I’m going to share 25 tried, tested and proven LinkedIn messages.


Each template includes notes that will hopefully help you determine
which of your prospects might benefit from it and how best to use it.


I’d then highly recommend finding the templates that suit each indi-
vidual prospect. It may be challenging at first, but as with anything,
once you learn and practice it, it soon becomes routine.
                                   60
                         One Size Doesn’t Fit All




Now, after many years of sending LinkedIn messages, I know very
quickly which template works best for each new prospect I approach.

   “There are people out there right now who need what you are selling
   but have no idea who you are. Each prospecting message that you send
   has the chance of reaching one of those people.”




                                    61
          PART 4
WRITTEN LINKEDIN MESSAGES




            63
                    CHAPTER 11

    THE SEVEN-­FIGURE
    LINKEDIN MESSAGE




H
    ere is the whole story of how a single individual LinkedIn mes-
    sage opened the door to one of the biggest sales in my career.


I will go into as much detail as I can as the processes completed
before and after the message are equally as important as the mes-
sage itself.


Setting the scene

Whilst working for a large IT company in the UK, my team mainly sold
IT training packages to SMEs (small to medium-­sized employers).

                                 65
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




When selling to SMEs, it’s often very easy to reach decision-­makers
via cold calling—­well, it certainly used to be back then—­as there
aren’t as many people or layers in the business.


We would go in and present a variety of training packages valued
between £3,000 and £18,000. The sales process often took around
1–2 months from prospecting through to closing.


Most of the time, we would first cold-­call to find the decision-­maker
and aim to either email information over or book a meeting straight
off the call.


During the meeting, we would then run through needs, listen and
learn about the prospect. After that, we would go back, put together
a proposal and call or meet them again to run through it.


It was a highly competitive market; we had a lot of competitors, some
bigger and some cheaper than us. A lot of our success came down to
either being the first to contact the prospect or our ability to build
stronger relationships.


Following some really rapid growth, and as the top-­performing per-
son in sales, I was tasked with bringing new, large corporate clients
to our portfolio. I very quickly found that cold calling was not as
effective as it was with smaller companies!



                                  66
                   The Seven-­F igure LinkedIn Message




Complex organisational structures and good gatekeepers made it
difficult to get in front of the decision-­maker. I learned how to do it
effectively, but some companies were extremely challenging.


I was working on a few companies—­global companies with multi-­
billion pound turnover. After, once again, getting stuck at the gate-
keeper on a cold call, I decided to look for other ways in. One thing
popped into my head: I wonder if the decision-­maker is on LinkedIn?


I didn’t have the name of the decision-­maker, only a few job titles
that I was currently working with. I was looking for HR Managers,
L&D Managers and IT Managers (and above).


After a quick search, there they were! I popped onto their profile,
had a read and soon qualified that this was the person I needed and
wanted to speak to.


Let me just pause this story for a minute whilst I talk you through
this stage:


The first step is to connect with your prospect.


LinkedIn InMails are okay, but they’re no different (in some ways worse)
than a cold call. When you connect with someone, you are able to send
them a LinkedIn message directly, which is far more effective compared
to an InMail, which is sent to someone you aren’t connected with.



                                   67
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Similar to most of the messages I get, most InMails are even
MORE sales-­y.


To be able to send a direct message, you need to connect with
them first.


When you go on their profile, if they’re a 2nd-­degree connection,
you’ll see the option to “Connect.” It’s a nice blue button just under
their LinkedIn banner.


  NOTE: If they’re a 3rd-­degree connection, you won’t see the “Connect” button but
  instead will see a “Message” button with a little lock image next to it. This means
  you can only message them via InMails if you have LinkedIn Premium or LinkedIn
  Sales Navigator. In the past, there was no way that you could send this person a
  connection request; however, LinkedIn has changed that now.


If you click the “More. . .” button next to the “Message” button, it will
open a section with four options: Share Profile, Save to PDF, Con-
nect and Report/Block.


If you click the “Connect” option, it will be the same as clicking the
connect button with a 2nd-­degree connection.


When you click on the “Connect” button, it will prompt a little pop-
­up that will say:



                                          68
                  The Seven-­F igure LinkedIn Message




   “You can customise this invitation.


   LinkedIn members are more likely to accept invitations that include
   a personal note.


   Add note – Send now”


Would you like to customise this request? YES! It can be very
helpful, depending on the prospect, to personalise your connec-
tion request.


However, personalising can work against you! Not only are there a
huge number of people out there that will be more than happy to
connect to you without a personalised request, but sometimes per-
sonalising it can discourage people from connecting.


I get tonnes of requests daily, and a large percentage of the person-
alised ones are personalised with a sales pitch! This does not help
increase your chances of getting accepted.


From my own experience connecting and messaging hundreds of
decision-­makers, the higher up or more senior the prospect, the
more beneficial personalising will be. The key is NOT to personalise
it with a sales message. There are several templates you can use for
this. Most of the time, I go with something simple like:



                                  69
                   THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




    “Hi Sally,


    I’d love to connect,


    Kind Regards,
    Dan”


Simple, personal and in no way presents me as someone who is going
to try and sell to them. This isn’t a sure-­fire, guaranteed way to get
them to accept; some people need more than this.


Some will need you to engage with their content a bit first. I judge
it by how active THEY are on LinkedIn. If they are quite active and
have a large network (over 1,000), that tells me they are going to be
quite likely to accept my request.


If they’re not very active and have a smaller network, it’s more likely
that I’ll need to build some rapport first.


Back to the story. . .


In this case, the prospect is active, so I went with the small, simple
personalisation. Within 30 minutes, they accepted my request—­a
great start to the process!


Sometimes, it can be smarter after connecting to engage with their
content a bit first or share your own content for them to see. You can

                                    70
                   The Seven-­F igure LinkedIn Message




do this over a few days or 1–2 weeks+ to build some foundations
before you go in to start a conversation. Again, make a judgement on
the prospect and also the proposition you are offering.


In this case, I was very confident that this company would need and
want the product I was selling (from qualifications I had already
gained). The prospect was active on LinkedIn, which showed me
that sending a message straight away might work well.


What I have found from experience is that the higher up the chain
you’re pitching, the more direct you should be. If you’re selling to
Directors or C-­Level positions, it can often work better to just go
straight in with a message.


BUT!


Obviously, it needs to be a well-­crafted message. . .


And this is where the £1,000,000 LinkedIn message was born.


Remember, this is NOT a sales pitch.


This is not about you listing loads of features and benefits or telling
them how amazing your product and company are.


It’s not about you trying to jump into bed with them straight away.

                                   71
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




It is NOT some spammy message.


It is NOT a copy-­and-­paste job.


It is a simple message with one simple goal. . .


To start a conversation with a potential customer.


Here it is. . .


    “Hi Sally,


    Thank you for connecting! I work for a company called X, who is
    one of the UK’s leading providers of IT Training. I would love to
    learn a bit more about what you’re currently using for that?


    Kind Regards,
    Dan”


It was that simple.


Before you start to feel underwhelmed by this message, this is the
message that opened the door to a sale valued at over £1,000,000.
It was this single simple message that did it. Not a cold call, not an
email, not a letter, not a text, not a video, not the type of LinkedIn
messages I get in my inbox, but this simple message.
                                    72
                  The Seven-­F igure LinkedIn Message




In sales, we know simple works best. It’s when we overcomplicate
things that they often go wrong.


This was a small conversational prospecting message that thanked
them for connecting, explained who we are and what we do, and
asked them a question about what they may already have in place for
that product or service.


As a decision-­ maker reading this, I’m not overwhelmed by
some sort of huge message or something that comes across in an
aggressive way.


It makes me think of that particular product or service and whether
or not I’m happy with what I’ve currently got, whether I need it or
whether I may want to change it.


Of course, this doesn’t work for everyone.


As I mentioned earlier, this isn’t something you can just copy and
paste a thousand times. However, with the right prospects, this can
and does work. For me, on this occasion and for this particular pros-
pect, I received a reply within an hour.


I can actually remember the exact moment; I was having lunch with
a colleague (fish and chips with a cold can of lemonade) and decided
to check my phone. Logging into LinkedIn, I saw the little notifica-
tion on the messages, opened it up and was met with a reply.
                                  73
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Let’s just say I did a little fist pump in the air when I read the reply
and saw there was a potential opportunity brewing right there!


This was the reply I received:


   “Hi Dan,


   Thank you for your message. This was well-­timed as it is some-
   thing that we’ve not done before but are actually starting to look
   at options now. Could you send me some more information about
   what you offer, please?


   Kind Regards,
   Sally”


It was a fantastic response; it showed interest and a potential
opportunity.


This is another very important part of the process. What do
you do next?


Some salespeople will try and send a load of information into another
LinkedIn message, which I must advise against! LinkedIn messages
are designed to be light and conversational; the moment more detail
and information comes into it, it’s time to move the conversation
away from LinkedIn.


                                   74
                    The Seven-­F igure LinkedIn Message




Only in specific situations will the conversation stay on socials,
depending on the prospect and the complexity of what it is
you’re selling.


The information I needed to send was best sent via email—­something
I still do to this day. My goal next is to try and get an email address
with permission to send them information.


I replied:


    “Hi Sally,


    That’s great to hear. What was the best email address to send the
    information across to?


    Kind Regards,
    Dan”


An email address soon followed, and I was then able to get to work
on crafting an effective sales email that contained some more infor-
mation but was designed to continue the conversation and, ideally,
move it onto a phone call or face-­to-­face meeting.


The email described our packages in more detail, explained some
of the other companies we had worked with and the results (ROI)
that they had achieved. The email ended with: “If it’s something


                                    75
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




that you’re interested in, I would love to pop in and explore in a bit
more detail.”


A meeting was confirmed, where I learned all about the company,
their past, present and plans for the future. It was clear they had a
real need for what I was selling; however, I was also made aware they
were exploring other companies as well.


We explored how this product could fit well, how it could work, and
what the process would be following this meeting. They had to run it
past the CEO before looking at a more detailed plan of action.


A couple of weeks later, I followed up with a phone call. The meet-
ing had been delayed with the CEO, but they were pushing for it
this week.


I then received a phone call later that week after the meeting had hap-
pened, informing me they were keen to move forward and wanted
me to come in to work out a more detailed plan of implementation.


There were two more meetings and several emails back and forth
while the final proposal was drawn up and then finally presented.


The process from start to finish took around five months. After
finally presenting the proposal, I was met with the response I had
worked so hard for:


                                  76
                     The Seven-­F igure LinkedIn Message




Eighty units at £15,000 each across four years were ordered, a deal
worth a total of £1,200,000.


One of the biggest sales of my entire sales career.


That whole deal, that whole million-­pound deal, started with one
single LinkedIn message.


Not a cold call, not a cold email, not a referral, not a networking
event, but one simple single LinkedIn message.


It’s not the phone VERSUS social selling.


One of the biggest debates that has raged across sales for several
years now is the whole phone/cold calling versus social selling. It
gets heated, emotional and often quite aggressive. Unfortunately, I’ve
been involved in several debates over recent years, but my message
has always been this:


  It’s not the phone/cold calling VERSUS social selling; it’s the phone/cold
  calling ALONGSIDE social selling.


As you’ll see from my example of the million-­pound LinkedIn
message, it was social selling that created the opportunity and
the phone that then progressed it, alongside email and face-­to-­
face meetings.


                                      77
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




It was the combination of all of these platforms that allowed me
to sell effectively and win this deal. I guarantee there would have
been other salespeople approaching this prospect but only using the
phone or even only using social media.


As Tony J Hughes describes it perfectly in his book, COMBO Pros-
pecting: It’s only by using all of these tools together that you can stra-
tegically sell to the modern-­day customer.


The £1,000,000 wasn’t won JUST on socials but was won through a
combination of all the key tools out there. It was, however, created on
socials, and this is why I’m so passionate about Social Selling. Had I
not utilised social selling, I may never have created or won this deal.


THE PROCESS

Here’s a summary of that process:


Stage 1 -­Find a decision-­maker on LinkedIn
Stage 2 -­Send personalised connection request
Stage 3 -­Send prospective message
Stage 4 -­Ask for email to send information
Stage 5 -­Send email with information
Stage 6 -­Follow up and arrange phone call to discuss
Stage 7 -­Have phone call and follow up with email
Stage 8 -­Arrange face-­to-­face meeting
Stage 9 -­Have face-­to-­face meeting

                                    78
                   The Seven-­F igure LinkedIn Message




Stage 10 -­Send follow-­up email
Stage 11 -­Build proposal
Stage 12 -­Present proposal
Stage 13 -­Follow up to close deal
Stage 14 -­Close deal and sign paperwork
Stage 15 -­Implement product/service
Stage 16 -­Gain referrals and a recommendation


And there you have it. . .


One simple LinkedIn message aimed at starting a prospecting con-
versation turned into an email with more information, which turned
into a phone call to discuss in more detail, which turned into a face-­
to-­face meeting to discuss a potential opportunity, which, after a few
more emails and meetings, turned into a signed deal.


As I’ve already mentioned that message template won’t work
for everyone.


This is why I’ve included 25 templates in this book.


What I hope you’ll see is that the £1,000,000 message and all of the
other templates have a few things in common. . .


They’re light, conversational and serve the same purpose of START-
ING the conversation. In my experience, this is the best way to lever-
age LinkedIn to sell.

                                   79
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Right now, a percentage of decision-­makers still prefer the phone as a
communication method. However, younger decision-­makers are ris-
ing, and current decision-­makers are becoming more digital-­savvy.


There are more and more people buying products, both B2C and
B2B, through total digital conversation.


I currently have several key B2B clients where the whole conversa-
tion, from prospecting, to qualifying, presenting and closing, is done
entirely on LinkedIn or other social media platforms.


Digital customers need digital sellers, so now is the best time to
start learning and mastering the digital and social selling landscape.
Learn to master all the aspects, including social media messaging.


Learn these message templates, find the prospects they are best suited
for, personalise them and feel free to make changes. You should know
your prospects better than anyone, so use these as guidance to help
craft the ultimate message for your prospects.




                                  80
                       CHAPTER 12

 25 WRITTEN SALES
MESSAGE TEMPLATES




T  here are so many ways you can craft effective LinkedIn messages,
   with the key always being to personalise them to each individual
prospect and customer.


I’m going to share with you a set of templates that I have used over
the years to generate sales opportunities selling IT, Software, Adver-
tising, Training, Events and Consultancy.


 NOTE: INSERT NAME – You will notice that each template starts with this. It is
 because this is SO IMPORTANT!



                                      81
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




   Personalisation is crucial when it comes to effective sales messaging. As I men-
   tion earlier in the book, messaging becomes significantly less effective when you
   adopt the “copy and paste” approach. It is worth the effort to ensure that you use
   your prospect’s name to help deliver the optimal impact of the message.



THE GOAL OF THE MESSAGE

You will notice that most of these templates focus on the goal of
opening the conversation or gaining an email address to send infor-
mation across. When it comes to social selling and LinkedIn, this
approach has become the most successful, in my experience, com-
pared to outright asking for a phone call or face-­to-­face meeting. By
offering to send more information with the aim of securing an email
address, you open the doors to conversation. Going in for the kill
and asking for a call or meeting is extremely “sales-­y” and aggressive.


   “But Dan, that’s what we do when we cold call. We want to speak
   to them and get a meeting.”


True, but that’s why ROI on cold calling is often below 2–3%. The
phone and socials are different platforms; we use them both very
differently.


I fully suggest you leverage cold calling and make your 50–100+
calls per day or whatever you need to make. However, when



                                         82
                  25 Written Sales Message Templates




leveraging social selling and, more specifically, LinkedIn messag-
ing, my advice is to use it to start conversations or get your foot in
the door where you can then EARN the opportunity to arrange a
phone call or meeting.


You’ll notice the usage of SOFTER words as well. . .


Throughout these templates, you’ll notice words like “believe,” “pos-
sibly,” “potentially,” “maybe,” etc. These are soft words and ones that
aren’t often encouraged in sales; however, when it comes to social
selling and utilising messaging on LinkedIn, it’s these words that I’ve
found deliver the best results.


Instead of “Hi, my name’s Dan, and I’m confident I could help you
with my product,” write “Hi, my name’s Dan, and I believe we may
be able to help you with this product.”


You avoid coming across as ego-­driven or arrogant and also avoid
sounding like an aggressive salesperson. Instead, the message and
tone are focused far more on helping them and how you believe you
may be able to.


I’ve tried and tested stronger, more assertive language in LinkedIn
messages, and I’ve tried and tested softer language, and, in my expe-
rience, the softer language delivers a far greater response rate.



                                  83
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Let’s get into these templates. . ..




After testing hundreds of templates over the last six years through
my own prospecting, with my sales teams and with the businesses
I have trained, here are the 25 that have proven to be the most
effective:


1. THE INTRODUCTION MESSAGE

  Hi (Insert Name),


  Thank you for connecting. I work for a company called (Insert company
  name), who is one of the world’s/region’s/local areas’ best in (insert prod-
  uct/service). If I can ever help you, please do let me know.


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


  NOTE: This works well as a friendly initial introduction. You’re not asking for
  ­anything, just letting them know what it is you do and that you are there if they
  need it.


If you catch someone at the right time when they need what you sell,
this message will generate a good response and is a great way to start
the conversation because it’s not aggressive or pushy, just a simple
introduction.



                                         84
                    25 Written Sales Message Templates




Some salespeople use this template, but instead of ending it with “if I
can ever help,” they go straight in and ask for a phone call or meeting.


This can come across as pushy and given the high chance you’ve
never met or spoken to this person, it doesn’t give them much reason
to speak to you. Instead, keep it open, let them know what you do,
and then step away to focus on other social selling activities, such as
personal brand and content.


I’d advise sending this message and then starting to work on engag-
ing with their content. “Like” and comment on some of their posts,
get your name before them and show interest, knowledge and value.


Take it a step further by regularly sharing your own content. This
will build your personal brand and build their trust.


Then after a few weeks, pop them another message more focused on
a potential ROI and ask to send them some more information (you’ll
see some examples of these messages below).


2. THE ROI INTRODUCTION

  Hi (Insert Name),


  I wanted to pop you a quick message to let you know that we help busi-
  nesses (insert ROI) with (insert product).



                                     85
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




  If you ever need (insert product), please feel free to get in touch for an
  informal chat.


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: A slight adjustment to the first template, this one is another introduction-­style
 post but with the addition of ROI.



I’ve used this when approaching more senior decision-­makers and
C-­Level prospects as the ROI cuts through the noise more effectively.


Showing them what you can do for them can act like a strong bait.
I used this one with a recruitment company that brought me in; we
crafted this message:


  Hi (Insert Name),


  I wanted to pop you a quick message to let you know that we help busi-
  nesses save up to 80% of their recruitment costs with our “straight to job
  board” system.


  If you would ever like to know a bit more, please do let me know.


  Kind Regards,
  Joe Bloggs


                                           86
                    25 Written Sales Message Templates




Again, this is a nice, soft introduction-­style message but one that is
attached with a potential ROI, which then becomes bait.


As a salesperson, by sending this message out to prospects, it’s like
casting fishing rods out into the river or sea. If there are fish (pros-
pects) who are ready to bite, they’ll bite and reply, and you can then
reel them in.


If they are not ready, that message will sit out there until they are
(whilst you utilise other social selling methods). The beauty of this
message is that for some, your name will stick in their head, and
they’ll remember what it is that you do.


3. THE PROBLEM SOLVER

  Hi (Insert Name),


  Thank you for connecting.


  I’d love to see if we may be able to help you (insert problem solved) with
  (insert product/service)?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan




                                      87
                       THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




  NOTE: This one is a step up from the introduction-style post and goes in with a soft
  question, essentially asking to talk. You thank them for connecting and then tell
  them how you would love to help them solve a particular problem with the product
  or service that you sell.


You ask in the form of a question so that those who have that prob-
lem and would like it solved are more inclined to then reply and
open the conversation.


This is a light message, quite soft and very simple. It’s not packed with
tonnes of features and benefits or a massive sales pitch, just a simple
comment that you may be able to help them achieve something.


4. THE VIDEO MESSAGE

  Hi (Insert Name),


  If you can spare three minutes, here is a quick video of how we’re helping
  similar companies to yours achieve (insert ROI) with (insert product) –
  (insert YouTube link or video).


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


  NOTE: A video is already an amazing sales tool and communication method, and
  LinkedIn gives you the opportunity to send videos through messages.




                                          88
                     25 Written Sales Message Templates




There are two ways you can do this: You can copy the link to a You-
Tube video or other hosted video, or you can attach it directly. These
videos should be 2–3 minutes long max and fully personalised.


Make sure you’re passionate about it; you need to be comfortable in
front of the camera, so lots of practice first is highly recommended.


If you can, I’d also recommend using subtitles/captions as well. A lot
of people are using LinkedIn in a working office and so often can’t
actually listen to any content online. Having subtitles means they can
still consume the video in their working day.


  I use a platform called Zubtitle (other great ones are available as well).
  It’s reasonably priced and super-easy to use. You upload the video, it
  adds the captions, you check them to make sure they’re right, and then
  you download it.


The big advantage of video is it’s the closest thing to face-­to-­face
interaction, which is the ultimate form of interaction you can have
with a prospect.


They can see you, look into your eyes and see the confidence
and passion that you have for your product and industry and in
helping them.




                                      89
                      THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




5. LOOKING FOR LEADERSHIP INSIGHT

  Hi (Insert Name),


  I’m looking for some information from (insert industry) leaders around
  how they do (insert subject). Would you be able to contribute?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: A great way to get your foot in the door with a potential client is to ask for their
 thoughts, knowledge and experience.



This works very well for tough decision-­makers, people who per-
haps have quite small networks or who have large networks but are
active on socials. Sometimes this shows a large ego, and so asking for
them to contribute feeds into that.


Not only will you gather great information that will help you, but
you’ll also build a stronger foundation for the relationship compared
to going straight in for the sale.


You can angle this around a specific blog that you’re looking to
write or even an industry whitepaper that your company is putting
together. It feels great to be needed and to have your insights wanted
for something relevant to the industry.



                                            90
                      25 Written Sales Message Templates




I’ve done this many times over the years, and it’s helped carve some
strong relationships and generate some very strong opportunities.


6. THE CASE STUDY INTRODUCTION

  Hi (Insert name),


  Last month, we worked with (insert customer company). They spent X
  and achieved an ROI of (insert ROI). I’ve had a look through your pro-
  file, and I believe we may be able to help you achieve something similar.
  Would it be possible to send you a little bit of information?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: Another template very powerful with higher-­level decision-­makers, this one
 lays out not just an ROI but evidence of how a company similar to theirs, and hope-
 fully a company they will know or recognise, has achieved it.



It’s important that this is 100% proven and factual and that you have
a full case study or testimonial to send them if they ask.


This works by sparking interest in either the company that you men-
tion or the ROI that they have achieved. This is a lot different from
most of the messages that prospects will receive, which are usually
more focused on the salesperson and not the prospect.



                                         91
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




This one is built for them—­it’s showing them that you have some-
thing that could and hopefully would benefit them, and you’ve got
proof of how it has helped someone similar.


If you’ve got the case study available as a nice document, you could
even attach that to the message as well so they can open it and read
the full thing, giving them more confidence in you and growing their
interest in what you’re offering.



7. THE FREE TRIAL OR DEMO OFFER

  Hi (Insert Name),


  Are you looking to save money (or another ROI) on your (insert product)?


  If so, I would love to help and offer you a free trial/demo of (insert product).

  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: Many salespeople out there will offer a free trial or demo of their product to
 help get into a company, show them their product and increase their chances of
 then closing the deal.


This message is built to show them the potential ROI that they could
achieve and then offer them the opportunity to try before they buy!


                                         92
                     25 Written Sales Message Templates




You’re ultimately trying to create a “what have you got to lose” situ-
ation. Once they see that and hopefully agree, the free trial or demo
then opens the door to the conversation and creates a sales oppor-
tunity for you.


If they don’t reply, utilise other platforms such as the phone, email
and post to ensure your message gets in front of them.



8. THE EVENT INVITATION

  Hi (Insert Name),

  I’m running an event at (insert location) on (insert date) and thought it
  might be something that would interest you. Would you like a free ticket to
  attend?

  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: Inviting someone to an event is a great way to prospect and create opportuni-
 ties and inviting them via LinkedIn can be a powerful way to do it.



As we all know, most decision-­makers receive hundreds of emails
every day, so when you send them an invite via email, there is a high
chance it will get ignored or sent to the spam folder.




                                          93
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Sending a nice, short message like this often stands a higher chance
of being seen and responded to. You can add a small amount of extra
detail, perhaps mentioning what is going to be covered. For example,
“We will have a Microsoft Expert in to discuss the latest technologies
on the horizon.”


If they reply, it’s a win-­win situation. If they say yes, it’s a win—­you
get them to your event and have the opportunity to impress them
and create a future opportunity.


If they say no, it’s still a win as they’re now talking to you—­you’ve
opened the lines of communication. They’ll give you a reason, which
will open up a warmer conversation.


If they just say no, a good way to try and keep the opportunity
alive is to offer some form of industry research document, guide
or eBook.


You’re still offering something of value, knowledge and insight but
without the need for them to move past their computer. There is
a decent chance they’ll accept, and again, this creates the opportu-
nity to talk.

You can follow up with a message after a few days, asking if they have
had a chance to read it or give them a call to discuss it.



                                    94
                      25 Written Sales Message Templates




9. WOULD YOU LIKE AN EBOOK?

  Hi (Insert Name),


  We’ve just released a new eBook on the latest (insert industry) trends.
  Would you like a copy?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: Following on from the previous template and the opportunity to send them an
 eBook, this message template offers that straight away. Perhaps you can’t put on
 an event, or you’d like quicker results.


Offering them a strong piece of industry content is a nice way to give
something first and create a warm conversation starter.


If they say yes, then send it and, similar to the message template
above, follow up to discuss it a few days after. If they say no, perhaps
look at sending the email directly with the content attached or, even
better, print it off and send it via post.


Decision-­makers will rarely receive something like that printed, so
it could make a good impact. Even if they say yes on LinkedIn, you
could send them a digital copy and send a printed one as well for
extra bonus points!




                                            95
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




An eBook or guide only needs to be ten pages long, ideally visually
strong, and containing some valuable insight or knowledge.


If you have a marketing department, they should be able to create
one quite easily. If you don’t have a marketing department, you’ll
be able to find plenty of free templates via Google or use Microsoft
PowerPoint to create one and save it as a PDF copy to send.


10. LINKEDIN RECOMMENDED YOU

  Hi (Insert Name),


  You came up as a suggestion on LinkedIn today as someone I should
  connect with. I’ve had a look at your profile and think we may be able
  to help. We provide (insert product/service) to help companies like yours
  achieve (insert ROI).


  Would it be ok to send you some more information?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: If you go into the “My Network” section on your LinkedIn profile, LinkedIn will
 give you a list of suggestions of people you could or should connect with. Within
 these lists are often prospects or people who work within prospective companies.




                                          96
                      25 Written Sales Message Templates




This is an effective template to use because it informs them that it
was LinkedIn who recommended they connect, and as the platform
that you’re on, it’s pretty trustworthy!


You then go on to find and give them the reason why the connection
made sense and how you think you could help them.


  TOP TIP: Alongside effective LinkedIn messaging, I would highly recommend that
  you grow your network on a daily basis.

 Using LinkedIn suggestions is a great place to start, and I recommend adding at
 least ten people each day. I wouldn’t add more than 25–35 per day because you’ll
 increase the chance that LinkedIn will block your account for over-­adding.



If they don’t reply, this will warm up the cold call a bit as you can refer-
ence the fact that LinkedIn recommended them to you and that after
doing some research, you believe that you may be able to help them.


11. CARDS ON THE TABLE

  Hi (Insert Name),


  We have a (new) product (insert product) that does (insert solution).
  I’m confident we could help you achieve (insert potential ROI) with it.
  Would it be possible to send you some more information?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan

                                            97
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




 NOTE: Being honest and upfront can be a powerful tool in sales. It’s important to
 remember your prospects are receiving tonnes of spammy sales messages on
 LinkedIn, via email and through cold calls every single day.



Very few will be upfront and honest that they’re trying to sell some-
thing, and so when a salesperson does put their cards on the table, it
can have a strong impact.


This message lays it all out simply, showing them what you offer and
what it can help them achieve.




12. THE SHARED LINKEDIN GROUP

  Hi (Insert Name),


  We’re both part of the (insert group name) group. I’ve actually been
  working with a few companies very similar to yours, helping them with
  (insert problem solved or ROI). Would it be possible to send you some
  information on how we may be able to do the same for you?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan




                                          98
                     25 Written Sales Message Templates




 NOTE: I’ll be honest—­groups on LinkedIn right now are not great. I live in the hope
 that LinkedIn will breathe new life into them, taking some advice from Facebook
 where groups thrive.



However, I would never advise you to ignore them altogether. There
are still tonnes of groups out there, some with thousands, tens of
thousands, or even hundreds of thousands of members.


It can be quite valuable to join industry groups and use the group as
an introduction topic through messaging. Stating that you are in the
same group as them will make you appear a lot warmer than just a
cold salesperson.


You could reference a recent piece of content shared in the group
or look for some engagement and interaction that they’ve done and
reference that.


BONUS TIP: Why not create your own industry group?! Build one
that is totally neutral, so not associated with your company, and
invite many of your prospects into it.


You can then control the content and use the group as a conversa-
tion starter with your prospects. Invite industry experts to contrib-
ute and build something that becomes a real value to everyone who
is involved.




                                         99
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




13. MUTUAL CONNECTION OR REFERRAL

  Hi (Insert Name),


  (Insert mutual connection/referral) suggested that I pop you a quick
  message as you may be able to benefit from what we offer here.


  We help people with our (insert product) to solve (insert problem).
  Would it be ok to send you a bit of information about what we do?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: Firstly, it is VERY important that if you are using this template, you are 100%
 positive that your prospect knows the person you’re going to reference! I say this for
 one simple reason: Just because someone is connected to someone on LinkedIn, it
 doesn’t mean that they actually know them.



If I contact a prospect and say, “John Smith suggested I pop you a
message,” and it turns out that my prospect has no idea who John
Smith is, it backfires quickly! LinkedIn might even be telling me that
John Smith is a mutual connection; however, it doesn’t mean that
they actually know them.

This works well when you have a referral or have actually been rec-
ommended by a mutual connection to reach out.



                                          100
                      25 Written Sales Message Templates




If you’re unsure, ask your mutual connection. Back to the example
above, I could message John Smith and ask him whether he actually
knows my prospect.

I could ask him to introduce me, or even if he’s not willing to do that,
if I can confirm that he knows him, then I can use the above template.


14. THE HONESTY MESSAGE

  Hi (Insert name),

  I’d love the opportunity to try to sell to you (insert product). I’m being
  completely honest here because I’m pretty confident that it’s something
  that will help you. If afterwards you believe it’s not right for you, then I’ll
  happily leave you alone.

  Would it be possible to send you some information or give you a call later
  this week?

  Kind Regards,
  Dan


  NOTE: This is similar to the cards on the table message but taken a step further
  where you lay out from the start that you’re trying to sell them something.



This same approach works well on cold calls, where you open the call
by admitting it is a cold call, and then you ask for 30 seconds to tell them
what it is about, and if they’re not interested, you can leave it at that.


                                          101
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




What you’re doing is showing honesty from the start, but you’re tell-
ing them you believe you can help them achieve something. Because
you’ve opened with honesty, they’re suddenly more likely to believe
you when you tell them that you think you can help them.


It’s one of the rare scenarios in sales where being honest that you’re a
salesperson actually helps BUILD trust!


15. DID YOU GET MY LETTER. . .?

  Hi (Insert Name),


  I just wanted to see if you got my letter in the post?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


  NOTE: Obviously, this template requires you to send a letter, but it creates another
  great opportunity to prospect. Few salespeople send letters anymore, so doing that
  in itself can be a powerful prospecting tool. Then following it up by messaging eve-
  ryone you’ve sent letters to on LinkedIn can help increase conversions.



Let’s say you sent 100 letters, and ten got back to you. By contacting
the other 90 via LinkedIn, you could convert another 10+ prospects.
It’s important to keep the LinkedIn message super-short and simple,
as this increases the chance you’ll get a reply. It will encourage them


                                          102
                       25 Written Sales Message Templates




to either acknowledge it, check to find the letter or tell you no, in
which case, you can confirm the details and send it again.


16. YOU’RE USING OUR COMPETITOR

  Hi (Insert Name),


  I noticed on your website/our competitors’ website that you’re currently
  using (insert competitor).


  We offer a very similar product but which has more features and at a
  more competitive price. Would it be ok to send you some information to
  see if you’d like to explore?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


  NOTE: This is one of my favourite templates and one I’ve used many, many times.
  What I like most about this is that you’re upfront and honest that they’re using your
  competitor but that you think you could offer them a better deal.



A lot of decision-­makers, whilst sometimes on the front of it are loyal to
their suppliers, are always keen to know what other options are out there.


They have numbers to hit as well, pressures and targets on them, and
if you can get them closer to that than the company they’re currently
using, they’re usually open to looking into it.


                                          103
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




It’s honest but not in an aggressive or confrontational way, just sim-
ply stating that they clearly need what you sell, and your product
might offer them more.


17. THE ROI QUESTION

  Hi (Insert Name),


  If I could save you (insert ROI) on your (insert problem), would you be
  interested?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: Whilst the same in some ways as previous templates, this one is a little more
 to the point. You’re asking them straight out if you could achieve something for
 them, would they be interested.



For example, going back to the previous example (Template #2)
about the recruitment firm pitching to save up to 80% of recruitment
costs, they may write something like this:


  Hi John,


  If I could save you 80% on your recruitment costs, would you be interested?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan

                                        104
                      25 Written Sales Message Templates




Imagine sending that to a hiring manager or business owner, who
would be spending thousands, if not tens of thousands, a year on
recruitment costs. It’s an attractive bait that will often generate
a strong number of bites, with people replying, “Yes, I would be
interested.”


This then opens the door for you to send information and start that
all-­important conversation.


18. RECENT ACTIVITY OBSERVATION

  Hi (Insert Name),


  I noticed today/yesterday/recently that you wrote about (insert recent
  post subject). This is something I’ve seen time and again, and you high-
  light it perfectly; it was a really great post! What do you think (insert
  subject-­relevant question)?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: When you visit your prospects’ LinkedIn profiles, search their recent activity
 and look for a piece of content that you can leverage to start a conversation.



That could be a post that they had written, a video they recorded, it
could be a post following an industry event they went to or even a
blog they shared or wrote.


                                         105
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




The key is to compliment them on the post and then ask a ques-
tion about the subject. Equally, if there is something you disagree
with, feel free to challenge them on it (politely or professionally!).
The aim is to encourage a response that can then open the door to
conversation.

It’s a good opportunity for you to showcase your interest and knowl-
edge of the industry and to start a neutral conversation based on a
shared interest, not just you wanting to sell them something!

Messages like this template follow the theme of not trying to jump in
bed with your prospect straight away.


19. THE PROFILE VIEW

  Hi (Insert Name),

  I noticed today you viewed my profile OR Thank you for viewing my
  profile today. I’d love to know what your company is currently doing/
  using for (insert product/solution)?

  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: This is another one of my favourite templates and one that has generated a
 lot of revenue for me over the years. It’s also one of the most under-­used areas of
 social selling.




                                         106
                  25 Written Sales Message Templates




Every day, people are viewing your profile (they should if you’re
active on LinkedIn). A percentage of those people will be prospects,
and it’s a tremendous opportunity for you to see when they’ve looked
at your profile.


I’ll share a case study I use in my training sessions that certainly
brings this template to life:


After checking my profile views, which I do once or twice a day, I
noticed that the Managing Director and Sales Director of the same
company had viewed my profile. Now, I sell three things personally,
LinkedIn training, Keynote Speaking and Advertising for The Daily
Sales. I could quickly see that this would be a potential interest in
LinkedIn/Social Selling.


It had been three hours since they had both viewed my profile, and I
hadn’t received a LinkedIn message or an email from either of them.


What had happened, which I later found out, was that they were
having their regular weekly meeting, and the topic of social selling
came up. Both were connected with me on LinkedIn and had seen
my content and activity. They discussed potential training and then
moved on to the many other things to discuss about the business.
Now, clearly for them at that time, it wasn’t a pressing need for them
to reach out to me; perhaps they would have done later that day, later
that week, maybe even later that month.



                                 107
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




We all know what it’s like—­we discuss tonnes of these things daily,
but they often sit on the back burner. After noticing that they had
viewed my profile and qualifying them as a potential prospect, I
sent them both the Profile View LinkedIn message following this
exact template.


I had a reply within ten minutes from the Managing Director.
It read:


   “Thanks for your message, Dan. Yes, we were discussing this
   today. We currently use LinkedIn a bit, but we would be inter-
   ested to see if there is more we could do with it. Could you speak
   to my Sales Director to explore?”


He helped me arrange a phone call, which led to three phone calls,
two face-­to-­face meetings and one lunch before they hired me to
train their company. Now they may have reached out to me, but as a
true hunter and sales professional, I didn’t want to leave something
like this to chance.


Ensure you check your profile views regularly, qualify those who
could be prospects, and use that profile view as the opportunity to
start a conversation.




                                  108
                      25 Written Sales Message Templates




20. THE DIRECT PROFILE VIEW MESSAGE

  Hi (Insert Name),


  I noticed you viewed my profile today. Are you possibly looking at (insert
  product/solution)?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: A more direct version of the profile view message. Instead of asking loosely
 what they’re doing relevant to your product/industry, this one goes straight to the
 question of whether they are looking specifically for what it is you sell.



I’d recommend only using this one once you’ve qualified that they
could be a potential prospect. I tend to use this one after a few days
of the profile view (changing the today part) and use it as a follow-­up
message for those who haven’t replied.


21. THE ENGAGEMENT THANK-YOU

  Hi (Insert Name),


  Thank you for liking my recent blog/post/video on LinkedIn! What were
  your thoughts on (insert content topic)?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan

                                          109
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




 NOTE: In a similar context to your profile views, the engagement on the content you
 share and create is another fantastic door-­opening opportunity. Once again, let me
 bring this particular template to life with a case study:

 When I was selling in the IT sector, I had not long started writing my own sales blog
 on LinkedIn as well. I’d publish an article a week on sales via LinkedIn, and they
 would gain some average engagement each time. Obviously, whilst sharing these
 blogs, I was looking to reach IT Managers and IT Directors of small-­to medium-­sized
 companies.



One company in particular that I was prospecting was proving
extremely tough to get through to. I’d tried cold calling multiple
times, left voicemails, and sent emails; I just couldn’t get the atten-
tion of the decision-­maker (something I’m sure a lot of salespeople
will relate to).


After sharing another one of my sales blogs one week, I noticed that
one of the sales reps at that company had clicked ‘like’ on my article.
I realised that whilst not the decision-­maker themselves, they could
hold the key to the decision-­maker. I sent them a LinkedIn message
following the Engagement template. The salesperson replied straight
away, and over a few messages, we discussed the topic of the blog.


After building some rapport, I earned the opportunity to mention
what I was selling. “Actually, I wonder if you could help me? I’ve been




                                           110
                    25 Written Sales Message Templates




trying to speak to your IT Manager about what we sell but am strug-
gling to get through to them!”


The salesperson was more than happy to help, providing me with an
internal introduction and arranging a phone call. I then used that
phone call to book a face-­to-­face meeting and turned that into a con-
firmed sale.


Now a big part of utilising this particular message template is the
requirement that you share or create content that drives engagement.
Unfortunately, there is so much to this that I physically can’t fit it
all into this book! If you’re interested in learning how to create the
best possible content on LinkedIn, have a look at www.danieldisney
.online.


22. GOING TO THE SAME EVENT

  Hi (Insert Name),


  I noticed that you are going to (insert event) next week. I’m going to be
  there as well and would love the opportunity to buy you a coffee. Do you
  have any free time in the morning or afternoon?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


OR

                                     111
                   THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




  Hi (Insert Name),


  Next week is the (insert industry event), and I wondered if you were
  planning to attend?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: Attending key events is a core part of networking and prospecting for
 many salespeople. Messaging prospects beforehand can be a unique way to
 book in meetings at the event before it happens, helping increase your chances
 of success.


There are two ways to utilise this message. The first is if you know
that they are attending. Perhaps their company posted that they were
attending, or perhaps they posted about it on their feed.


Either way, if you know they’re attending, you have an opportu-
nity to invite them for a coffee or lunch to chat with you whilst
you’re there.


The other way is assuming you don’t know whether or not they’re
attending an event. You can use this opportunity to message them
and ask if they are planning to attend.


If they are, you’ll know and then be able to ask if they’d like to grab
a coffee. If they aren’t attending, you’ve brought the event to their
attention, showing that you are immersed in your industry.

                                      112
                      25 Written Sales Message Templates




23. THE SHARING CONTENT MESSAGE

  Hi (Insert Name),


  I’ve just published an article/post/video on LinkedIn on your industry
  (insert industry). I’d love to know your thoughts!


  Kind Regards
  Dan


 NOTE: Another sound way to start a conversation is to give value by sharing a piece
 of content that you think they will enjoy or benefit from.



I must stress, you need to make sure the first time you use this on a
prospect that the content you choose to share with them is as good as
possible. If you send them something that isn’t good, you’ll decrease
the chance they’ll read anything else from you.


Find or create an amazing piece of content that is absolutely packed
with value for them and send it. You can expand this message a bit
to describe what’s included in the content or why you think it would
be valuable to them.


The aim is to get them to read/watch/listen to the content so that you
can then use it to create a conversation. With the right content, you
are also able to make a good first impression with them and poten-
tially build the layers of trust as well.

                                          113
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




24. THE RESEARCH MESSAGE

  Hi (Insert Name),


  I don’t want to waste your time, but I’ve done some research on you
  and (insert their company) and believe we could help you achieve
  (insert ROI).


  Could I send you a quick email, and if it’s something you’re potentially
  interested in, perhaps we could jump on a call?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: The reason this template works so well is that you are showing effort; you
 are showing them that you have done the research and believe you can help. A lot
 of salespeople, especially in years past, would just phone cold data from a spread-
 sheet.



They had no idea who they were phoning or whether that person
would benefit. What this template does is the opposite; it shows
them that you HAVE researched them and believe you can actually
help them.


I must stress that this isn’t one that can be copied, pasted and sent
to everyone in your network. You actually do have to research



                                        114
                      25 Written Sales Message Templates




them, qualify them and have a good reason for wanting to
message them.


It’s worth that extra effort, though, trust me. This is how you stop
wasting time trying to sell to anyone and everyone and start invest-
ing your time talking to the right people whom you are more likely
to actually convert into sales.


25. THE MISSED CALL MESSAGE

  Hi (Insert Name),


  I tried to call you today, but you were busy. I noticed on your profile that
  you are the (insert job title) at (insert company). I believe we may be able
  to help you achieve (insert ROI) and wondered if I could send you some
  more information by email?


  Kind Regards,
  Dan


 NOTE: The power of this one is that it shows you made an effort and tried to phone
 them. For a lot of people, this is the sign of a strong salesperson and not just some-
 one sending spammy messages one after the other. I must say that it is very impor-
 tant that you ACTUALLY do try to call them!


I can imagine some salespeople trying to “hack” their way with this,
sending loads of LinkedIn messages saying they tried to call, and



                                          115
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




then when the prospect checks and finds out they didn’t actually call,
creating a bigger problem!


However, for a lot of you reading this book, you will already be mak-
ing tonnes of cold calls each day and following up each of those on
LinkedIn with a message like this can really help.




                                  116
                     CHAPTER 13

           TOP WRITTEN
           MESSAGE TIPS




A
    s I mentioned at the start, sending written messages on LinkedIn
    is still, and always will be, an incredibly effective form of pros-
pecting and communication. Some people out there prefer a written
message over any other form.


Hopefully this chapter and the templates in Chapter 12 gave you eve-
rything you need to begin sending more effective written messages.
In addition, I would like to add some of my top tips:


• You should only send messages to people whom you genuinely
  believe you can help. Before messaging, pre-­qualify them first.

                                  117
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




• You should also do some level of research on the person before
  you send a message to give you an opportunity to personalise it.
• Remember, the more you make the message about them, the more
  likely it will be that you’ll get a reply.
• Sending messages outside of common working hours can
  be an effective strategy as a lot of decision-­makers are busy
  between 9 and 5.
• Sending messages at the weekend is also something to consider
  with a lot of people just as active and potentially more available.
• Keep them short and sweet; they are an instant message,
  not an email.
• Before you click send, read it and put yourself in their shoes.
  Would you read and reply to that message?
• If they don’t reply to your written message, avoid sending another
  written message to follow up. Instead, look to try an audio or video
  message (as covered in the upcoming chapters).




                                  118
         PART 5
AUDIO LINKEDIN MESSAGES




          119
                    CHAPTER 14

    AUDIO VOICE NOTES
       ON LINKEDIN




I
  magine being one of the first salespeople to make cold calls, back
  when the phone was a novelty, back when getting a call on your
phone was one of the most exciting things to happen. Many today
might find it hard to believe, but there was a time when it would
make your day to get a call on your phone and talking on it was just
as exciting.


Back then, I can imagine the conversion rates on sales calls were
incredibly high because there wouldn’t have been many salespeople
phoning people, so the ones that did would often clean up.


                                121
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Now imagine being one of the first salespeople to send a prospect-
ing email. Back when people didn’t get many emails, each one would
be opened and read with interest. Fast forward to now, it’s safe to
say the majority of people hate getting cold-­called, hate getting calls
from unknown phone numbers, and rarely answer them. (No, I’m
not suggesting cold calling is dead; whilst I said many, there are still
people who do answer calls!) As for email, people get hundreds each
day, with their email addresses programmed into multiple cadence
and marketing tools (again, I’m not saying that email doesn’t work, it
does, it’s just a lot more challenging than it used to be).


Well, whilst it’s nice taking a trip down memory lane, what if that
opportunity existed today to use something that was new, something
that not many salespeople were using, and something people got
excited to receive?


Sounds exciting, right?


Well, it’s very much true, and it very much exists, so let me show you.


I recently ran a poll on The Daily Sales LinkedIn page, on which
7,248 salespeople voted.


The results of that poll didn’t surprise me, but they may surprise you.
What the results do show is one of the BIGGEST opportunities for
salespeople right now. . .


                                   122
                       Audio Voice Notes On LinkedIn




If 94% of salespeople aren’t doing this yet, now is your time to
get ahead.


The poll that I shared asked one simple question. . .


How many audio voice messages do you send on LinkedIn per day?


  (I’m going to show you exactly how to send them in this article, so keep
  reading if you want to create more sales opportunities and pipelines
  with them.)


Before we continue, let me highlight some of the REPLIES &
RESPONSES that I have received and have seen from other sales-
people who have been sending audio voice messages on LinkedIn
from their prospects:


   “I didn’t know you could send messages like this on LinkedIn!
   Thank you, I’d love some more information.”


   “This message was great! Yes, I’m interested in booking a meeting.”


   “No one has sent me an audio message before, good job! I’m open
   to hearing more about your product.”


Let me explain why this is such an exciting opportunity, just like
COLD CALLING used to be. . .


                                    123
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Can you imagine being one of the first salespeople ever to make
cold calls? Back all those years ago when the phone was still new,
and people LOVED getting phone calls?! The salespeople who were
brave and bold enough to make them cleaned up.


Well, audio voice notes are still new, especially to LinkedIn and espe-
cially in the B2B space.


Even out of the 6% of salespeople that are sending them, 4% are
sending only 1–10 per day.


To help, I’m going to show you EXACTLY how to send them and
what to say. Read on for more in Chapter 15.




                                  124
                    CHAPTER 15

     HOW TO SEND
   AUDIO VOICE NOTES
      ON LINKEDIN




U
    sing the mobile LinkedIn app, when you log in and go to send a
    message, you will see a microphone icon next to the space where
you would normally write the message.


When you select that button, you’ll see the above pop-­up. When
you’re ready, you’ll need to press AND hold that blue section in the
middle with the microphone on it. You need to keep it held for as
long as you’re recording, and when you’re finished, take your finger
off the button.

                                125
                   THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




 NOTE: You can record up to a maximum of 60 seconds per audio voice note.



Once you’ve finished, the app prompts you and asks if you want to
send the message. If you made any mistakes (we all do, it’s normal!),
you can cancel it and record it again until you get it right. When
you’re happy, click send, and the message will send.


BIG QUICK SALES TIP: Audio voice notes are the perfect follow-
­up message.


If you’ve sent a written message to a prospect (and you can go back
6–12 months) and they HAVEN’T replied to you, go back and try
sending an audio voice note instead.


What are my top tips when sending audio voice messages on
LinkedIn?


1) Practice, practice, practice. If you’re nervous or have never
   recorded one before, just start recording some voice memos on
   your phone to get comfortable with doing it. It will make you feel
   more confident and will help you get used to doing it.
2) Focus on your TONE. Stand up if you can, smile when you speak
   and make sure you’re engaging.
3) Keep them short, sweet and to the point. Even though they’re
   only 60 seconds, if you want them to listen all the way through
   and reply, you need to give them a good reason to do so.

                                      126
                How To Send Audio Voice Notes on LinkedIn




4) Avoid sending more than one if it’s the first message you’re send-
   ing. If the audio message is your first or prospecting message,
   only send one; try not to send multiple so that you can send more
   than 60 seconds’ worth.
5) Make sure the audio message is about THEM, what you think
   you can do for them, how they will benefit, etc. It’s not about
   what you’re trying to sell but how it will help them.


So, if you want to get ahead of your competition, start sending more
audio voice messages!


Successful audio voice notes generate responses just like this:


   “Wow, I didn’t know you could even do this on LinkedIn! Yes, I’d
   love to learn more about that.”


   “You’re the first person to ever send me an audio message on
   here. Thank you! Please send me more information to. . .”


   “It’s great to get a message from a real person and not something
   automated. I’m not the right person to speak to, but here are the
   details for who you should approach. . .”


I’m hoping that if you are one of the 94% of people not sending voice
notes, you’re now starting to see the opportunity in front of you. This
is why I knew writing The Ultimate LinkedIn Messaging Guide was


                                   127
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




crucial and why, in the following chapters, I show you how and when
to do it, and I’ll provide multiple scripts you can use.


WHEN TO SEND AUDIO VOICE NOTES

Audio voice notes can be used at any time, and there is little evidence
that they are more effective at different stages of the sales process.
At the beginning of this book, we discussed the prospecting maze,
showing how different people prefer to communicate in different
ways. It’s the same on LinkedIn; some people love audio voice notes,
and others hate them. There are people who love video messages and
people who hate them, and there are people who love written mes-
sages whilst others do not.


PROSPECTING – Audio voice notes can be incredibly effective as a
  first-­touch prospecting message.
FOLLOW-­UP – If you’ve made a cold call and left a voicemail, sent
  an email, or even sent a previous LinkedIn message, an audio
  voice note is great for following up.
CLOSING – After you’ve sent over the contract, an audio voice
  note can make a great message to confirm what the next-step
  options are.
ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT – Don’t wait for formal chats with
  your accounts. Send voice notes on a semi-­frequent basis so they
  feel valued.




                                  128
                     CHAPTER 16

             THE TWO MOST
               IMPORTANT
              COMPONENTS




W     hilst there are many things to consider when sending an audio
      voice note, such as research, personalisation, timing, etc., there
are two components above all that are the most important.


Those are:


• TONE
• RELEVANCE


                                  129
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




When people listen to an audio voice note, your tone impacts what
they think of you and your message, and the relevance will deter-
mine whether they act as a result of your message.


TONE

If you’re a cold caller and have had good cold calling training, you
should be a master at tone! Nothing I say here is new or different
apart from treating an audio voice note tone the same way you would
a cold call or a voicemail.


When changing or choosing the tone of your voice, consider these
key areas:


• Inflection: Changing the pitch of your voice can make your words
  more exciting, energetic, or sincere.
• Emphasis: Underlining certain words can help convey enthusiasm
  and importance.
• Pace: Speaking too quickly can make you sound nervous or
  stressed; speaking too slowly can make you sound disinterested
  or unprofessional.

The biggest tip I’ll give is to either stand up when recording voice
notes or sit up with your back straight to ensure your voice sounds
clear. When you’re facing the table or floor or reading a script, it can
negatively impact your tone and how your message is received.



                                   130
                  The Two MOST IMPORTANT Components




Personally, I like to walk around when I record audio voice notes,
which is exactly what I used to do when I was a cold caller back
in the day.


RELEVANCE

We’ve already covered this in the book, so I’m not going to repeat it,
but I do want to highlight that this is an incredibly important com-
ponent that will directly determine whether or not your audio voice
message gets a reply.


This is why I’ve included multiple templates to give you plenty of
options to make your message relevant to each individual prospect.




                                 131
                     CHAPTER 17

      LINKEDIN AUDIO
     VOICE NOTE SALES
         SCRIPTS




H
    ere are ten different scripts for audio voice note prospecting and
    sales messages that you can use. Remember, these are templates,
they are simply the guide—­you’ll need to edit them to make them
relevant to each prospect that you send them to.


With audio messages, you can record up to 60 seconds per message,
and my advice is that for initial prospecting messages, you only send
one single 60-­second message. During conversations, you can then


                                 133
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




send multiple audio voice notes if what you need to say takes more
than 60 seconds.


  DISCLAIMER: Any names of people, companies and products are all
  fictional but merely used to give you the most real template possible for
  you to base yours upon.


AUDIO MESSAGE SCRIPT 1 – THE PLANTED SEED

   “Hi Tom, I just wanted to say thank you for connecting. If you’re
   ever looking to provide LinkedIn or Sales Navigator training for
   your sales team, please do let me know. I deliver live online pro-
   grammes and in-­person ones as well. If you’d ever like a little more
   information, just let me know, and I’ll send some over.”


 NOTE: The goal of this audio message is simple, let them know what you do and
 where you are if they need you. If it’s the right place/right time, then you might
 get an interested reply. But for everyone else, simply back this up by building your
 personal brand and sharing content on LinkedIn so that when they are ready, you’re
 the person they go to.



AUDIO MESSAGE SCRIPT 2 – THE PROFILE RESEARCH

   “Hi Holly, I had a little look through your profile and noticed
   that you’re the SDR manager at Thrive, and it looks like you have
   around six SDRs in your team right now. I actually run a Social
   Selling Bootcamp for SDRs, which can help them book significantly

                                         134
                    LinkedIn Audio Voice Note Sales Scripts




   more meetings through LinkedIn. If you like, I can send you a bit of
   information on what is covered.”


 NOTE: You can’t just pull random information from their LinkedIn profile, you need to
 make sure it’s relevant to you, your product and/or your company.




AUDIO MESSAGE SCRIPT 3 – THE REFERRAL

   “Hi John, last week, I delivered a two-­day LinkedIn Masterclass
   with someone I believe you know, Sarah Smith, over at Pipedrive.
   Sarah said she would pop you a quick note as well, but she thought
   your team at Seamless might also greatly benefit from the training.
   If you would like, I’d be happy to jump on a quick call and talk you
   through what we covered in the training and see if it’s the right fit
   for the team.”


 NOTE: This has to be 100% verified and an official referral, which you will need to
 seek if you haven’t already got one that you can use. Referrals are super-powerful
 as a lead generator and as a prospecting message.




AUDIO MESSAGE SCRIPT 4 – THE CONTENT REFERENCE

   “Dale, I loved your post yesterday promoting your new team
   members—­the team is growing so fast! Funnily enough, I actually
   worked with John a few years ago. He was fantastic, so you’ve got a
   good one there. Next time you’re hiring, let me know, and I’ll share

                                         135
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




   the job with my network. Might be a few other good connections
   that could be a good fit.”


 NOTE: This is a pure conversation-­starting script, the goal simply being to build
 rapport and talk. If you wanted to turn this into a pitch message, you would simply
 change the “next time you’re hiring” to:

   “I’m imagining you’ve got a strong induction and training plan for those SDRs, but
   one thing I’ve noticed many companies struggling with is training their new SDRs
   on LinkedIn & Social Selling. I actually run an SDR bootcamp and can send you
   some more information on what we cover if you like.”




AUDIO MESSAGE SCRIPT 5 – THE REAL ROI EXAMPLE

   “Hey Thomas, we recently ran a sponsored webinar with Outreach
   where we generated 1,426 leads for them. I wanted to ask whether
   you think Clair might be interested in doing something similar?
   We completely run the webinar ourselves and include promoting
   the sponsor during advertisements, throughout the webinar itself
   and in the follow-­up email with a recording. Our sponsors get all
   the registrant details, including full name, email, phone, company,
   location and role. If it’s something you might be interested in, I’d
   love to talk you through some of the details.”


 NOTE: For this to work, these need to be real numbers that you can verify and prove
 if required.


                                            136
                     LinkedIn Audio Voice Note Sales Scripts




AUDIO MESSAGE SCRIPT 6 – THE EVENT INVITE

   “Hi Sam, are you attending the Marketing Leadership Summit this
   year? If you’re not, I’ve got a free ticket and space at our table if
   you’d like to join us. Looks like a great line-­up of speakers and ses-
   sions. We’re inviting a few people from our LinkedIn networks, and
   I thought you might be interested in attending. If you are, let me
   know, and I’ll send over the ticket and details.”


 NOTE: If you want to find events, type your target decision maker or prospect into
 the LinkedIn search bar and filter by events. This will bring up events coming up in
 your industry that your prospects might be attending or interested in. It’s also worth
 doing an internet search for local or industry events that also might be relevant to
 them.




AUDIO MESSAGE SCRIPT 7 – THE FREE OFFER

   “Hi Lilah, I was having a look through some of the LinkedIn pro-
   files of your sales team, in particular John, Sarah, Clive and Harry,
   and I noticed quite a few gaps. I’ve done a quick assessment and
   wondered if you’d like me to send it over? It’s completely free, but
   if you go through and see that there is an opportunity for training,
   I’d love to talk you through some of the LinkedIn & Social Selling
   programmes that we offer.”


 NOTE: Try to find something you can offer that will be valuable and relevant to them.
 It could be an eBook, webinar, training video, audit, insights, etc.


                                           137
                      THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




AUDIO MESSAGE SCRIPT 8 – THE COLD CALL

   “Hi Frank, I tried to call you today and left a voicemail but thought I’d
   send you a quick voice note on LinkedIn as well. We’ve recently done
   some training with a few of your competitors, including Salesforce,
   HubSpot and Pipedrive, and I wanted to ask if the Dynamics sales
   team might benefit from some advanced social selling training? It cov-
   ers all core areas, including messaging, content and personal branding,
   and can help salespeople increase their pipelines by up to 55%. If you’re
   potentially interested, I could send you some more details via email.”


 NOTE: The perfect follow-­up to an unanswered cold call is an audio voice message
 on LinkedIn!




AUDIO MESSAGE SCRIPT 9 – THE EXPERT ARTICLE

   “Hi Brandon, my name is Dan, and I’m currently writing an arti-
   cle sharing the top-ten tips from sales experts, and I wondered if
   you would share one or two of your biggest tips for it? I’d love to
   include you in the article, which will link through to your LinkedIn
   profile and company page. If you’re interested, let me know, and I’ll
   send over some more details about the article and what we’re look-
   ing for. I hope we can include you as part of it!”


 NOTE: You’ll see this template in all forms of messages in this book because it is an
 incredibly effective one that brings so much value. The key is that you actually write
 the article as well (which is in your best interest).


                                            138
                   LinkedIn Audio Voice Note Sales Scripts




AUDIO MESSAGE SCRIPT 10 – THE THOUGHTFUL GIFT

   “Hi Wendy, I had a quick look through your LinkedIn profile today
   and noticed you follow Jeb Blount, and I wondered if you’d been
   able to get a copy of his latest book? I actually have an extra copy
   and would love to send it to you if you’d like it. It focuses on selling
   in a crisis, which I know is going to help a lot of sales teams and I’m
   sure will be valuable for you and your team.”


 NOTE: Gifting is a powerful form of prospecting, and platforms like Reachdesk and
 Sendoso provide B2B options to make this as efficient as possible.




                                        139
                BONUS CHAPTER

              AUDIO VOICE
               NOTES 101




T   his chapter is written by someone I regard as the QUEEN of
    audio voice notes on LinkedIn, the incomparable Holly Allen.
I’ve been working with Holly for several years now and am always
blown away at her experience, creativity and success in sending voice
notes on LinkedIn and training SDRs to do the same.


This bonus chapter is full of incredible value, and my advice is to
read it, digest it and implement her advice. I’ll add a QR code at the
end of the chapter that will link to her LinkedIn profile so you can
follow her there.




                                 141
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Voice notes 101

Voice notes will forever be my favourite way to prospect. They are
hyper-­personalised and make our prospects feel special without
being too invasive. You can create so much excitement around what
you’re saying simply by using energy and intonation in your voice.
The real beauty of voice notes is not enough salespeople are using
them or even know how to send a voice note, so the ones who do
stand out from the crowd and get responses.


Sending a voice note on LinkedIn is pretty simple; the first step is
to send a connection request to your prospect, as you cannot send a
voice note without being connected. Once they’ve accepted, you’ll
need to download the LinkedIn app on your phone if you haven’t
already. Click on the send message widget, search for the person
you want to send the voice note to, and then hold down the record
button next to the message box and speak into your phone. A voice
note can be up to 60 seconds long, and if you mess up and need to
re-­record it, simply drag the record button to the left. Once you’ve
sent your hyper-­personalised, energetic voice note, like magic, a
blue play button will appear in your prospects’ LinkedIn inbox.
How intriguing—­I know!


I’m a big advocate for sending a voice note pretty much as soon as
someone has accepted my connection request. This way, you create
a sense of urgency, and your name and company name are likely
to still be fresh in their mind as you’ve literally just connected with


                                   142
                          Audio Voice Notes 101




them. This immediacy will make your prospects feel special, so start
the voice note by saying something along the lines of, “Hi Name,
thanks for accepting my connection request so quickly! I appreciate
this voice note is totally out of the blue and you’ve literally just con-
nected with me, but I’m super-excited to talk to you.” It goes without
saying, everyone loves to be made to feel special.

The word “special” has come up a lot here—­that’s because voice
notes are for your super-special prospects. Those C-­Suite, in-­demand
prospects that everyone wants a piece of. Chances are, they’ve
already received five cold calls by 10 am, and their email inboxes
are bombarded—­you’ve got a pretty good chance of standing out by
doing something different and grabbing their attention.

So, you’ve sent the connection request, they’ve accepted, and you’re
getting giddy as you go to send your first voice note. But what do you
say?! Enter panic mode. . .

The key to creating a voice note script is that there is no voice note
script. This is your chance to be hyper-­personalised, showing off
your knowledge and research on that prospect and their pain points.
You know that phrase in sales, “show me you know me”? Exactly that.
Each voice note you send is likely to be different to the one before.

As a rough guide, I’d always open with a welcoming phrase like, “Hi
Dan, Holly here from THRIVE. Thanks for connecting with me, and
happy Monday!”


                                   143
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Then comes our personalisation. “Dan, I appreciate this voice note is
completely random, and you definitely weren’t expecting this today,
but I saw your recent post on World Mental Health Day and how
exercise really helps you. Being an avid runner myself, I had to reach
out—­running is definitely my happy place, too!”


Then we go into our very (and I mean very) subtle sell: “On the topic
of World Mental Health Day, it looks like you’re doing a great job over
at COMPANY with topical campaigns, and I have no doubt you’ve
got your content calendar sorted for the rest of the year. Not sure
if you’ve ever heard of YOUR COMPANY, Dan, but we work with
the likes of RELEVANT COMPANY and RELEVANT COMPANY
on their campaign strategies to improve employee awareness and
engagement on such important events.”


And we end with our soft CTA: “I’d love to show you what these pre-­
built campaigns look like or even have an idea share! Let me know if
you’d be up for a virtual coffee sometime soon!”


The key with voice notes is not to use them as an opportunity
to have 60 seconds to pitch your product. Make it sound super-
conversational, using an upbeat, friendly tone of voice. I’d recom-
mend walking around the room with a natural smile on your face—­it
will make a difference, I promise.


Say the prospect’s name at least twice throughout the voice note. It
will keep them engaged and makes it feel even more personalised.

                                  144
                          Audio Voice Notes 101




And try not to read off a script! It’s difficult at first, I know, but
when we read off a script, we tend to sound like a sales robot. A few
“umms” and “ahhs” are completely okay but try to plan out what
you’ll say before recording to avoid too many of these.


So, we’ve sent the voice note—­all very exciting. Now what? What
if they don’t reply? It’s definitely achievable to get a response after
sending one voice note. In the scenario that they don’t respond, wait
two days and then follow up with a message along the lines of, “Hey,
Dan, appreciate that voice note was super-random ^ haha! Did you
have a chance to listen to it? ☺”


And then, if they don’t reply to that, wait another two days and
go in with a sad meme and a message like, “Was it really that bad,
Dan? 😢”


And voila! That is voice notes 101.


Disclaimer: Not all of your prospects will appreciate a voice note.
I’d always suggest having a look at your prospect’s profile first, their
persona, their activity, and using your emotional intelligence to
determine whether this is going to go down well or not. That said,
my experience of sending voice notes and the responses from pros-
pects have by far been the most positive out of all the prospect-
ing channels!


Good luck!

                                   145
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Make sure you follow Holly on LinkedIn to get more incredible
insights, tips, strategies and ideas around Sales, SDRs, Social Selling
and Audio Voice Notes -­https://www.linkedin.com/in/hollyallen1/




                                  146
         PART 6
VIDEO LINKEDIN MESSAGES




          147
                     CHAPTER 18

       VIDEO MESSAGES
         ON LINKEDIN




I’d like to start this chapter by jumping straight to the elephant
 in the room and identifying two undeniable truths with video
messages. . .


1. They are incredibly effective.
2. They are scary to do for the first time.


Video messages, for most people, are scary. They’re scary to record
and horrible to watch (who actually likes watching themselves?!).
For the first few months that I started recording and sending video


                                    149
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




messages, I would go out to my car where no one could see, hear or
watch me. After recording them, I could never watch them back, as
watching myself and listening to myself made me curl up inside.


BUT I saw the value in sending them.


You see, we are all inundated with written messages, written emails
and written texts. Video allows people to actually SEE and HEAR us,
to see our eye contact and to see our body language. In all fairness,
it’s the next best thing to seeing them in person. We all know that
the same words can be read and interpreted in a number of ways,
whereas with a video, not only do you add tone, but you add every-
thing else on top.


Before I run through the steps of how to send them and share my
top sales scripts for LinkedIn video messages, I want to run through
my top tips for anyone who hasn’t yet sent a video message and who
might be nervous or uncomfortable doing it.


OVERCOMING THE FEAR OF VIDEO

There are multiple reasons people are hesitant to record and send
videos to prospects and customers, including:


• I don’t know what to say.
• I don’t look good enough for video.
• I don’t know how to do it.

                                  150
                       Video Messages on LinkedIn




• I don’t like the sound of my voice.
• I don’t have anywhere to record them.

Some may be making additional excuses to themselves, such as “my
customers don’t like video messages” or “video messages won’t work
in my industry.” If this is you, I hate to say it, but this is probably
more in your head than in actual reality—­feel free to message me
directly if you disagree.


Let’s face a few truths, though:


• Video is booming.
• YouTube is a prime example of the power of video.
• Platforms like TikTok highlight the value.
• Zoom/Teams has grown incredibly over recent years.




                                   151
                    CHAPTER 19

 FROM VIDEO TO SALE
    IN 24 HOURS




I
 once created and closed a sale within 24 hours, starting with a per-
 sonalised video message sent to a prospect. Now, not every video
message will convert that quickly! But. . .


Let’s start with WHY I sent the video message on LinkedIn in the
first place. . .


There are many prompts and reasons to message a prospect on
LinkedIn, from seeing them share a piece of content or finding some-
thing on their profile to hearing their company make an announce-
ment; the list goes on.

                                 153
                   THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




In this situation, a prospect of mine had announced they were start-
ing a new job at a new company.


Now it was the WAY they had announced the new job that
prompted me.


They shared a video to announce it!


That made it an easy choice to use a video message to start a
conversation.


Now here’s an important part of this situation:


  I saw their post within five minutes of it being shared BECAUSE I had
  clicked the new notification bell on their profile, which notifies me
  every time they post something! This allowed me not only to like and
  comment on their post straight away but also message before any of
  my competitors did.


  (If you’re not already utilising this, click the notification bell on all of
  your prospects’ profiles so you get notified every time they share content!)


Here’s where you can find the notification bell:




                                      154
                     From Video To Sale In 24 Hours




I grabbed my phone straight away, opened up a message and clicked
the “Record Video” option on the LinkedIn app.


My message was simply this:


   “Hey John, HUGE congratulations on the new role. I wasn’t expect-
   ing this announcement, but I’m so happy for you. You’ve done so
   many amazing things at CURRENT COMPANY, and I can’t wait to
   see you do amazing things at NEW COMPANY. I know you’re super-
   busy, but it would be great to catch up soon. It’s been way too long.”




                                  155
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




No selling. No pitching. Just a heartfelt message.


In under an hour, they replied.


Not only did they reply, but they replied with a VIDEO MESSAGE!


Their reply said:


   “Thank you so much, Dan. That’s very kind of you to message, and
   yes, I know, it’s a bit crazy! It would be great to catch up soon. In
   this new role, I’m going to have a bigger team and a bigger budget
   and would love to get you in. Let me know when you’re free, and
   we’ll book a chat in.”


Now, at this point, it doesn’t make sense for me to reply with a video
message because my goal is to book this chat in. So, I replied with a
WRITTEN message, highlighting that I had a one-­hour gap that day
or a few options the following two days.


They replied with a written message saying that today worked, and
so the call was booked.


That call lasted 28 minutes, and at the end, we had agreed on what
they needed, so I sent the proposal over, and within a few hours, it
was sent back signed.



                                     156
                    From Video To Sale In 24 Hours




From LinkedIn video message to sale within 24 hours.


Obviously not EVERY video message will turn into a sale or turn
into one in under 24 hours.


The key messages I want to convey in this chapter are:


• Video messages are one of the highest-­performing forms of pros-
  pecting right now.
• With all messaging, the key is hyper-­personalisation; make it as
  much about THEM as possible.
• Speed is CRUCIAL; we are all up against a lot of competition, so
  reacting as quickly as possible to opportunities is very important.
• Just be human and have human conversations.




                                 157
                    CHAPTER 20

     TEN VIDEO SALES
     MESSAGE SCRIPTS




I
  t’s worth noting that the video scripts here can work as audio
  scripts as well and vice versa. The only two differences between
them are that with video, you can record up to two minutes, whereas
with audio, you can only record 60 seconds—­and with video, they
can see you!


One of the most important components of an effective video mes-
sage is to ensure you’re looking at the camera and keep strong eye
contact (not in a creepy way) and be aware of your body language as
well. Your body should face the camera and if you speak with your
hands, do that; let them see your passion and energy for what you do.

                                 159
                      THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




A few things to consider before recording:


• Your background – Think about what is behind you when you
  record, and make sure it is tidy and professional.
• Audio & lighting – If you’re doing video from your laptop, con-
  sider external lighting and a microphone for better quality.
• What you wear – You should be dressed the same way that you
  would if you were meeting them in person.


VIDEO SCRIPT 1—THE INTRODUCTION

   “Anna, it’s Dan here from The Daily Sales. I’ve been a huge fan
   of Salesforce for a long time and used it a few years ago for my
   sales team. The Daily Sales is a sales community with over 900,000
   salespeople following our page, and we work with companies to
   help them reach that audience. If you’re open to it, I’d love to send
   you a little more information on how our customers turn those fol-
   lowers into customers. If you’re interested, just let me know the best
   email, and I’ll send it over.”


 NOTE: Make sure you’re looking at the camera, smiling and speaking with a positive
 tone to help them feel comfortable replying to you or coming to you when they’re
 interested if it’s not right now.




VIDEO SCRIPT 2—THE WHITEBOARD

*Holding whiteboard with their name/company name*

                                        160
                       Ten Video Sales Message Scripts




   “Simon, I’d love to see if I can help you save up to 80% of your
   recruitment costs this year. We have software here that has helped
   165 companies so far reduce their recruitment costs by automating
   the process and pulling together multiple candidate databases. I
   noticed at Salesforce you’ve currently got 27 active roles that you’re
   hiring for, and it looks like you work with a few recruitment agen-
   cies as well. If you’re open to it, I’d love to send you some more
   information on what our software does and how it works. If you’re
   interested, just let me know the best email, and I’ll send it over
   straight away.”


 NOTE: You can buy a whiteboard for minimal cost on Amazon or through an internet
 search. You can go a step further and doodle/draw their company logo or create
 something funny or relevant to them.



Try to be creative with what you write on the whiteboard, this is
one of the more common forms of video messaging used by sales-
people so a lot of your prospects may already be getting whiteboard
LinkedIn video messages.


Look for ways that you can stand out or do something a little dif-
ferent (different colours, a joke written down, an observation, etc.).


VIDEO SCRIPT 3—THE RESEARCH REFERENCE

   “Hi Ryan, I was just looking through your posts on LinkedIn
   and noticed a couple of weeks ago that your company RepVue

                                        161
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




   announced series A funding—­congratulations, by the way! I saw
   in the article that one of the things you were looking to use the
   funding for was to reach more people and bring on more users. I
   run a community on LinkedIn called The Daily Sales, which has
   over 900,000 salespeople following the page. I’d love to see if we
   could help you drive our followers to become RepVue users. Would
   you be up for jumping on a call to explore?”


 NOTE: Try to ensure that your research reference is RELEVANT. For example, if you’re
 going to reference a funding announcement, make sure you read some articles on
 the funding to identify what they plan to spend that funding on. Just because a com-
 pany has received funding, doesn’t mean they have cash to burn. Most companies
 do a press release and often share where the money will go, for example, expanding
 sales, investing in product development, customer acquisition, etc.



The research needs to be done properly and relevant to them.


VIDEO SCRIPT 4—THE WEBSITE BROWSE

*Using Vidyard with their website in the background and your face
in a little bubble on the page*


   “Hi Emma, I was just looking at Lead Forensics’ website (which
   you’ll be able to see that I was on!), and noticed that currently you
   have five active roles for your sales team across the US. We have
   quite a few candidates who I believe would be a perfect fit and who
   are ready to interview. They each have a 2–4-­week notice period

                                         162
                        Ten Video Sales Message Scripts




   before being able to start. We put a lot of work into our vetting
   process and ensure that all our candidates have proven success in
   their existing or previous roles, which we verify ourselves. If you
   like, I can send you some information on our process, and if you
   are interested, I can send these candidates over straight away.”


 NOTE: When you use platforms like Vidyard and have your prospect’s website in
 your video it takes personalisation to a whole new level, and if you can find some-
 thing relevant, then it takes relevance to a whole new level.



It could be something on their main page, a press release, job adverts,
a testimonial from a company you’ve also helped or a piece of con-
tent. Look for something with the strongest link to what you want to
talk to them about.


VIDEO SCRIPT 5—THE LINKEDIN PROFILE VIDEO

*Using Vidyard whilst scrolling through their LinkedIn profile*


   “Hey Tyler, my name is Daniel, and I work at The Daily Sales. I’ve
   been following you for a while on LinkedIn and absolutely love what
   Sales Feed is doing. As I was on your profile today, I noticed about
   a month ago you joined Sales Feed. I thought it would be worth
   sending a quick message to ask if you already had a website visitor
   tracker in place or not. Our software here at Lead Forensics allows
   you, your marketing team and your sales team to identify which
   companies are visiting your website and sources their contact details

                                         163
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




   so you can turn more of those visits into leads and customers. If you
   are up for it, I’d love to send some information on how it all works.”


 NOTE: Same as script 4, using Vidyard with THEIR LinkedIn profile in the background
 takes personalisation to a new level. Relevance is important here as well; there is no
 point using their LinkedIn profile if there is nothing relevant to reference.



Look through their summary section, their work history, inter-
ests, recommendations, endorsements, again anything that has the
strongest link to you, your product and/or your company.


VIDEO SCRIPT 6—THE CONTENT REFERENCE

   “Darryl, I was reading your post today and wanted to send you a
   quick message as the story really resonated with me. As someone
   who counts themself as an introvert as well, it was great to see
   your post highlighting how this can actually be a superpower in
   sales. I’m not sure if you’ve heard of Gong, but we have software
   that records and analyses cold calls for sales teams. We’ve found
   it to be really helpful for introverted sales teams as it takes away
   the unnecessary pressure of having a manager listen in whilst you
   make the calls. Would you like me to send you a little more infor-
   mation on what it does and how it works?”


 NOTE: This is obviously only applicable if your prospect is sharing content on
 LinkedIn (which many will be). The beauty of this script is that it gives them a little
 ego boost by complimenting their content (trust me 99% of people will feel good if


                                           164
                          Ten Video Sales Message Scripts




 you compliment their content). Not only that, it then allows you to tie in something
 relevant that links to you and your product.

 EXTRA NOTE: If your prospect isn’t sharing content on LinkedIn, look at other people
 in their department and within their organisation as there will be some people shar-
 ing content and they could be worth engaging with and messaging as a different
 door into the company.



VIDEO SCRIPT 7—THE REFERRAL

   “Hi Harriet. Yesterday I spent the day with Chris and the team at
   Gong, training them on how to leverage LinkedIn to its full poten-
   tial. The feedback was brilliant, and after, Chris suggested that I
   send you a quick message as he thought your team would benefit
   from the training as well. He said he would message you himself,
   too, but I wanted to ask if I might be able to send you some more
   information on what’s included in the training and how it could
   help? If you’re possibly interested, all I need is an email address,
   and I can send some information over straight away.”


 NOTE: Just mentioning a referral is powerful, but if you can get your customer to
 send your prospect a message as well, then the impact is greater. Although I do
 appreciate this isn’t always something easy to arrange.



VIDEO SCRIPT 8—THE EXPERT INSIGHT

   “Hey Nick, I wanted to send you a quick video as I’m currently
   writing an article on LinkedIn, which will be titled five big tips
                                         165
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




   from five software marketing experts, and I would love to include
   you in it. Given your position as CMO at Cognism and your 20+
   years of experience in marketing, I think your tips would be incred-
   ibly valuable to our audience. If you’re able to spare a few minutes
   to answer a few questions, I’d love to have you as part of the article.
   Let me know if you’re able to join in, and I’ll send over the details.”


 NOTE: Eye contact is key in this video to make them feel like you really do want
 THEM to be a part of your article. Send this to 5–10 of your biggest prospects and
 not only will you create a fantastic piece of content, but you’ll start conversations
 with a lot of those prospects.




VIDEO SCRIPT 9—THE SIMILAR COMPANY INSIGHT

   “Hi Beth, I was speaking to Darryl at Agorapulse yesterday, and he
   shared something quite interesting that, as a CMO, I thought you
   might find beneficial. Over there, they are putting a lot of focus
   into building a media part of the business to compete on social
   media, something I’ve seen a few other companies start to do as
   well. I’m not sure if it’s something you’ve considered at VanillaSoft.
   Darryl shared a few suggestions on how they were going to do this.
   Would you like me to send them over?”


 NOTE: This template was actually created after I spoke to a CMO who told me that
 the one thing they want from salespeople is to be taught something. To be shown
 what other similar companies are doing that they might not know about.



                                         166
                        Ten Video Sales Message Scripts




VIDEO SCRIPT 10—THE THOUGHTFUL GIFT

   “Hi Sharon, I saw your post with you and your daughters build-
   ing Lego sets together, and I honestly thought it was amazing! Our
   company knows this wonderful place where you can build a cus-
   tom Lego figure, and we would love to send you a Lego to go with
   your sets. I just need to know where to send it, and I’ll get it made
   and sent to you straight away. I’m sure it will make a great addi-
   tion to your city.”


 NOTE: This template will take some deep researching (which may include venturing
 outside of LinkedIn and onto Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, TikTok, etc.). But if you
 can find something about them that connects to a potential gift, then it can be an
 effective way to build relationships and open doors. It’s also worth looking at any
 podcast interviews they might have done or webinars they might have been a part
 of as people will usually open up about more things like this during smalltalk.




                                         167
                BONUS CHAPTER

     SENDING LINKEDIN
     VIDEO MESSAGES




T   his bonus chapter is written by one of the most experienced
    and successful LinkedIn video experts out there, Jarrod Best-­
Mitchell. As you’ll read below, Jarrod has sent over 6,000 person-
alised video messages on LinkedIn, and his knowledge and tips are
incredibly powerful.


I’ve known Jarrod for many years, and when I interviewed him for
The Social Selling Podcast, I was blown away by some of his unique
but hugely effective video messaging tips. I hope you enjoy this bonus
chapter.


                                 169
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




OH, HOW I LOVE SENDING VIDEO MESSAGES ON LINKEDIN!!!

When LinkedIn first introduced the ability to send video messages
to your connections back in late 2018 or 2019, I was already heavy
into sending voice notes to my new connections, and I saw this
as an upgrade and an even better way to build my community on
the platform.


To date, I’m proud to say that I’ve sent close to 6,000 and counting
PERSONALISED video messages to my LinkedIn connections. I have
seen about a 40% response rate and an immeasurable ROI in terms
of my pipeline, my personal brand and engagement on LinkedIn.


Why should you send video messages to your connections?


Even though it has been available for over three years, very few peo-
ple still send them. VERY FEW. I’ve gotten less than 50 video mes-
sages. Many of the top content creators on the platform also mention
that they don’t get video messages, so sending a personalised one is
a great way to stand out.


Video messages help build community, and that converts your con-
nections into customers.


What is the #1 reason why you would want to do a video? It’s person-
alised, and it lets the receiver know that you took time out of your
day to send them that message. As corny as that sounds, it creates a

                                  170
                     Sending LinkedIn Video Messages




bit of reciprocity with the recipient, and if it’s thoughtful, researched
and personalised, it will have the impact you want.


Here’s what is stopping you from doing video messages to prospects:


Vanity: You’re focused on your looks. But think about it; at the end
of the day, the receiver must see you one day in person or virtually,
so why not do the video now and get over that hurdle? Are you going
to show up to the meeting with a bag over your face or the camera
switched off?


Not sure what to say: Most people, when they connect with you
on LinkedIn, say, “Thanks for connecting.” But if you’re using the
­platform to generate business, you want to say something that gener-
 ates a response, and this is where most people get stuck. As someone
 who has optimised hundreds of profiles on LinkedIn, clients give
 me access to their page, and I’ve seen the messages some ­people
 send. . .MOST are AWFUL and have a low response rate. So, it’s
 understandable why most don’t do it because they don’t see it getting
 a better response than their current method.


Don’t worry. At the end of this chapter, I’ll share my framework and
structure for sending a great video message.


Automation: There are so many automation tools out there that will
help you reach your ideal client with text at the click of a button. I’m
not surprised that text is still the go-­to for many. Text is easier but,

                                   171
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




in most cases, not personalised and more likely cut and pasted. Most
of the people you’re targeting have gotten an automated message in
the past, so unless the copy is really, really good, it’s unlikely that the
message will stand out.


For the few of you who have conquered your fear or reluctance to do
video, here are some of the mistakes I see you make.


You say YOUR name: When you send a message to someone on any
social media platform, your name is at the top of the message box.
So, it’s surprising to me that many people repeat their name when it’s
already there, but I believe that’s due to sending a video message like
it’s a phone call.


The message is too long: 30 to 45 seconds is best for any message.
Be specific in your messaging and keep it to one topic/ask.


Look at the camera: Not the screen. Have you ever seen a video
where it looks like the person is looking down at you? That’s because
they’re looking at their phone screen instead of the camera. Eye con-
tact is important when sending a video.


Pitching too hard: Don’t make your first message a 100% sales
pitch. Focus more on determining their interest instead of asking for
a meeting.




                                    172
                       Sending LinkedIn Video Messages




Not looking at their profile: If there’s one thing that turns off many
on LinkedIn, it’s asking a question that is already answered on their
profile. What impresses them is referencing to something from
their profile.


Untidy background: YES, we have all judged someone based on
this. But sometimes, an untidy background can turn off the recipi-
ent of your video, so before sending your video, find a clean corner
and neutral background, if possible. If you’re in an area with a lot
of background noise, use captioning tools like CapCut to add cap-
tions to your video. Sometimes the receiver is also in an environ-
ment where it’s not possible for them to listen to your video, but they
can most definitely read along with the captions.


Wear your company polo shirt or have it in the background.


Incorporate a whiteboard: Use it and have the connection’s name
on it.


 NOTE: You can only send a video message if you are connected to the person or if
 they’ve responded to your InMail message.



We’ve spent enough time on what’s stopping people from posting
and the mistakes they make. Now let’s focus on best practices.




                                       173
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Here are my top tips when doing videos on LinkedIn.


• Start by saying their name. Don’t say good morning or good day.
  Don’t EVER say your name. The best way to get their attention is
  by saying their name. Think of it as if you called them out on the
  street. “Hi, Daniel!”
• Wipe your lens. YES. Videos DMs can only be done via mobile
  or using Vidyard if you’re sending while in LinkedIn Sales Nav,
  so WIPE YOUR LENS. I’ve seen too many cloudy videos, and as
  minor as that is, it can be a turn-­off for the receiver.
• Incorporate a whiteboard. I got this tip from Vidyard, and it’s really
  helpful. Someone seeing their name on a whiteboard emphasises
  that it’s a personalised message.


Here’s when you should send a video message.


I send a video message as the first message to all my connections.
After that, I correspond via text or voice, but I use video to create a
great first impression.


Videos should definitely be sent to all of your connections; how-
ever, if time is against you, ensure you send them to all of your
ideal clients.


How soon should you send a video message?




                                   174
                    Sending LinkedIn Video Messages




I usually send messages within a week of connecting. I’ve found that
sending it right after connecting with someone can be a turn-­off. If
it’s someone from a company you’ve wanted to reach, still wait 24
hours after connecting to send the video message.


Video Messaging Script

Standard – Daniel, thanks so much for making me a part of your
LinkedIn network. Really looking forward to engaging with you on
this platform. (9secs)


If you want to, reference to a post they made.


Standard – Daniel, thanks so much for connecting—­your last post
about [insert topic] was [insert]. ________________.


Mention what resonated and that you look forward to engaging with
their content more on the platform.


Connect with a call to action; their name, purpose for connecting,
what is the value that I can bring?


E.g., Hi Daniel, my reason for connecting is because I have been help-
ing small businesses in London (similar to yours) that are concerned
about the risk their business is exposed to. The content on my page




                                  175
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




gives lots of advice on that topic; however, if learning more about that
is a priority for you, let me know if you’re open to a meeting.


Don’t pitch: e.g., asking for a meeting, pitching your products or ser-
vices or including your calendar link.


Don’t miss out on the opportunity that is video DMs on LinkedIn.
Pretty soon, many more people will start doing it, and it will be
overused as much as text. It is a great way to cut through the noise
with your prospect and will help build your personal brand in the
long term.


Make sure you follow Jarrod on LinkedIn to get more incred-
ible insights, tips, strategies and ideas around Sales, Social
S­elling and Video Prospecting at https://www.linkedin.com/in/
 jarrodbestmitchell/




                                   176
          PART 7
INMAIL MESSAGES ON SALES
        NAVIGATOR




           177
                    CHAPTER 21

     INMAIL MESSAGES
       ON LINKEDIN




F
    or anyone who hasn’t used Sales Navigator before, it’s a premium
    platform that LinkedIn offers that works alongside LinkedIn. By
paying a monthly fee, you get a whole host of additional features,
one being the ability to send messages to people you’re not con-
nected with yet. If you hadn’t noticed, you cannot do this on stand-
ard LinkedIn; you are only allowed to directly message 1st-­degree
connections—­people you are directly connected with.


With Sales Navigator, you are able to send a number of InMail mes-
sages to people you are not connected with (the number of InMails


                                179
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




you’re allowed to send will depend on the level of membership you
or your company has).


Now, let me first address the elephant in the room. . .


When someone receives a LinkedIn InMail, they often know one
simple truth:


  You have PAID to send them that message. And if you have paid to
  send them that message, it is probably because you want to or are try-
  ing to sell them something!


This puts you at an INSTANT disadvantage when using InMails.
They’re no different from sponsored ads that you see on most social
networks, adverts that companies have paid a lot of money to get in
front of your eyes. When you see them, you often are quite quickly
put off; it’s no different from seeing a salesman approaching you at a
shop—­you know you’re about to be sold to.


So, when decision-­makers see an InMail in their inbox, the likeli-
hood is high that they’ll be sitting there thinking, “Oh, here we go.
Just another sales pitch,” to which they’ll probably either delete it
straight away or ignore it.


DON’T WORRY, THOUGH. . .




                                   180
                      INMAIL MESSAGES ON LINKEDIN




Whilst I’m painting a pretty bad picture for InMails, there is hope.
They can actually be INCREDIBLY effective when done right, and
in this chapter, I’ll share all of my secrets to turning InMails into a
pipeline and sales.


Let’s first look at why many InMail messages DO NOT work. The
majority of companies that hire me to train their teams on Sales
Navigator often tell me the same thing: the vast majority of the
InMails their salespeople send do not get responses. When I say the
vast majority, I’d say close to 98–99% don’t work. In some companies,
it’s 100%.


I won’t draw this out. I’ll tell you exactly why they’re not working:


1) They’re focused on what the salesperson is selling, not how the
   prospect will benefit.
2) They’re rarely, if ever, personalised. They often just copy and
   paste templates.
3) They usually ask for more from the recipient than the mes-
   sage gives.


In Chapter 22, I’ll share ten tried, tested and proven templates. But
first we need to get them to open and read the message, which will
have a lot to do with the subject line that you include.




                                  181
                     CHAPTER 22

        INMAIL SUBJECT
            LINES




W     ith a standard LinkedIn message that you send to a 1st-­degree
      direct connection, there is no option to include a subject line.
However, with InMails to people you’re not connected to, you have
to add a subject line so that they have some idea why you’re messag-
ing and what your message is about.


That subject line has a big impact on whether they open and read
your message, so getting it right is crucial. If a prospect gets an
InMail and it has a spammy, non-­relevant subject line, do you think
they’ll really want to read it? Given that their phones, email inboxes


                                 183
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




and LinkedIn inboxes are likely to be FILLED with salespeople try-
ing to sell, the need to stand out has never been higher.


The BIGGEST InMail subject line tip. . .


Drumroll. . .


MAKE IT ABOUT THEM!

It sounds so obvious, and yet out of 100 InMail subject lines that I
studied, 90% were about the salesperson, the company or the prod-
uct, not about me. So, whilst this may seem like an obvious tip, the
vast majority of people are simply not doing it.


Within each InMail template that you see in this book, you’ll see that
it comes with a suggested subject line. Edit these to suit your product
or business; they are there to give you an idea of how it should read.
Not only that, but at the end of each template, you’ll also see a sug-
gested CTA (call to action).


The Call to Action is what you would like them to do next, whether
it’s to send an email address, agree to a call or answer a question. It’s
important to make sure your CTA is appropriate for the prospect
you’re messaging and for the template you’re using.


Get the subject line and CTA right and pair it with a good template,
and you’ll be heading in the right direction for more replies and
more interested prospects.

                                   184
                      CHAPTER 23

      TEN INMAIL SALES
         TEMPLATES




INMAIL TEMPLATE 1—THE EXPERT ARTICLE

SUBJECT LINE: I’D LIKE TO INCLUDE YOU IN OUR ARTICLE

Hi Oscar,


I’m writing an article titled “The Top 10 Expert Marketing Trends
for 2023,” and I wondered if you would like to share your top trend in
it? It will include ten trends by ten marketing experts, and given your
extensive experience, I’d love to include you in it. If you’re interested,
it should only take 5–10 minutes, and I can send over some more
detail on the article and what we would need.

                                   185
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




I hope you can be a part of it.


Kind Regards,
Dan


TEMPLATE 1 NOTES: This is one of the most effective InMail tem-
plates as it not only gives value to the prospect by giving them the
opportunity to be in an article, but it also gives you the opportunity
to create a great article and then progress the conversation.


IMPORTANT: This isn’t just a hollow message; this will only work if
you actually write the article (which it is in your best interest to do).


My recommendation is to send this to 5–10 of your top prospects
each month/quarter. Use their insights to create one, or a few, arti-
cles on LinkedIn. After each one is published, reply to the prospect
sharing the link to the article and thanking them for their time, and
then progress the conversation. Something like this:


    “Hi Oscar, thank you so much for sharing your insights for our
    article, here is a link to it – www.linkedin.com/articlelink. I know
    you’re heading up the marketing team at Apple, and I wanted to
    ask which software you were using for XYZ?”




                                   186
                      TEN INMAIL SALES TEMPLATES




INMAIL TEMPLATE 2—THE REFERRAL

SUBJECT LINE: DALE DUPREE SUGGESTED I GET IN TOUCH

Hi Christine,


Dale Dupree suggested that I pop you a quick message as he
thought you and your team might be looking for LinkedIn & Sales
Navigator training. I just delivered a two-­day LinkedIn Master-
class to the team at Copier Ninjas, and Dale said that he thought
you might be interested in something similar. If you’d like, I’d love
to send over a bit more detail on what we cover and what we did
with Dale’s team.


Kind Regards,
Dan


TEMPLATE 2 NOTES: A key part of this InMail message is to
mention the referral’s name 2–3 times as this provides more reas-
surance to the prospect and validity to your product or service.
It can also be worth including the results or impact for them
of your product/service as well, with either an ROI number or
even a bit of text from a recommendation or testimonial from
them.




                                 187
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




INMAIL TEMPLATE 3—THE STRAIGHT TO THE POINT

SUBJECT LINE: I THINK I CAN HELP YOU SANDRA

Hi Sandra,


I can imagine you get a lot of sales InMail and messages on LinkedIn,
so I’ll get straight to the point. I think I might be able to save you,
and Adobe, up to 80% of your recruitment costs with our system
here at RecruitX. I can see you currently have over 30 open roles
advertised, so I can imagine saving money on filling them would be
worth exploring. If you’d like, I’d love to jump on a quick 15-­minute
call to show you what we do and to see if it might be beneficial to
explore further.


Kind Regards,
Dan


TEMPLATE 3 NOTES: This template only works when the focus
is on what’s in it for them. There are many “straight to the point”
InMails out there that jump into a pitch that’s focused on the prod-
uct, not the solution.




                                  188
                       TEN INMAIL SALES TEMPLATES




INMAIL TEMPLATE 4—THE ROI NUMBER

SUBJECT LINE: B SYSTEMS MADE AN EXTRA $3 MILLION

Hi Colin,


This year, I delivered a sales kick-­   off keynote and a 12-­    week
LinkedIn training programme to B-­Systems. In the 12 months fol-
lowing, they’ve accredited an extra $3 million in sales from their
team’s LinkedIn activity since the training. Given that you are a simi-
lar company with a similar size team, I’d love to see if we might be
able to help you get more from LinkedIn and grow your sales over
the next 12 months and beyond. Would you be open to me sending
a little more information on what we cover?


Kind Regards,
Dan


TEMPLATE 4 NOTES: If you don’t have a simple ROI number, then
look for other ways you can demonstrate the positive impact of your
product/service on a customer that you know would also impact the
person you are messaging.




                                  189
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




INMAIL TEMPLATE 5—THE TESTIMONIAL

SUBJECT LINE: THE BEST SKO KEYNOTE YOU’VE HAD

Hi John,


Richard Kingsley from ABC Software just wrote a testimonial for a
sales kick-­off keynote that I did for their team, saying it was the best
they ever had. The talk covered how their sales team can bring cold
calling and social selling together for epic results, and I wondered if
you might be looking for a speaker for your next sales kick-­off?


Kind Regards,
Dan


TEMPLATE 5 NOTES: If you can try and use a testimonial or rec-
ommendation from someone similar to the person that you’re send-
ing to, either from a similar company, in a similar industry or in a
similar position, this will increase the impact that it will have.




                                   190
                      TEN INMAIL SALES TEMPLATES




INMAIL TEMPLATE 6—THE FREE OFFER

SUBJECT LINE: FREE CMO EBOOK FOR YOU

Hi Shane,


We’ve just finished a 160-­page eBook sharing insights from some of
the world’s leading CMOs, which we’re offering to marketing leaders
today. Would you like a free copy?


Kind Regards,
Dan


TEMPLATE 6 NOTES: The above is a small template example, and
you can make it slightly longer, but the goal is to offer them some-
thing genuinely relevant and valuable to them, but they need to reply
to get it, so you open the door of conversation. This could be an
eBook, webinar recording, online course, ticket to an event, physical
gift, or anything like that.




                                 191
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




INMAIL TEMPLATE 7—THE INMAIL VIDEO

SUBJECT LINE: A SHORT VIDEO FOR YOU SARAH

*Using Vidyard to create InMail video*

Hi Sarah,


I recorded a short two-­minute video for you as I believe we might be
able to help INSERT THEIR COMPANY both to save money on print
costs but also reduce time wasted on errors and fault calls. I’ve done
some research on INSERT THEIR COMPANY, which I share in the
short video, and if it’s something you’re potentially interested in, let
me know, and I’ll send over some more information.


Kind Regards,
Dan


TEMPLATE 7 NOTES: You have an option to just send the video,
to which I would recommend reading through the video chapters
(Chapters 18, 19 and 20) and perhaps looking at the suggested tem-
plates. However, it can also be effective to include a link to a video
and then have a template like this that tells them why they might
benefit from watching the video. Some decision-­makers find videos
awkward and don’t want to watch them as they have no idea what
they contain. By telling them, it helps persuade more to watch it and
then hopefully reply.




                                   192
                      TEN INMAIL SALES TEMPLATES




INMAIL TEMPLATE 8—THE PROBLEM SOLVED

SUBJECT LINE: GET GONG’S SDRS SELLING QUICKER

Hi Devin,


Getting SDRs from start to hitting a number can take time, and that
time costs you money. The longer they’re not selling, the more they
cost you. And that’s IF they then hit a number, which we know some
won’t. We have a solution that can help them start hitting numbers up
to one month quicker, and the number can be significant, depend-
ing on how many SDRs you hire. Would it be okay to send you some
information on how we do this?


Kind Regards,
Dan


TEMPLATE 8 NOTES: The key to this template is to identify, high-
light or focus on a common problem your prospect has and how
you can potentially solve it. Try not to be assumptive, but share your
experience with similar prospects, the problems that they are facing
and how you’re helping to overcome them.




                                 193
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




INMAIL TEMPLATE 9—THE NEW IN-­ROLE MESSAGE

SUBJECT LINE: CONGRATULATIONS ON YOUR NEW ROLE, STEVE

Hey Steve,


Firstly, congratulations on your new role at Salesforce! It’s quite a
change from your last job at Buffer, but I can imagine you’re excited
for the new challenge. I’m sure you’ve got a crazy few months ahead
of you, but I wanted to reach out as we’re working with companies
similar to Salesforce, helping them reach more people through their
content. Our audience has over 900,000 people, and I wanted to ask
if you’d be open to exploring whether there might be opportunities
for us to help Salesforce reach them?


Kind Regards,
Dan


TEMPLATE 9 NOTES: Try to dig a little deeper when congratulat-
ing them, not just a simple well done! Mention their previous role,
mention something about their new company or their team; dig as
deep as you can and make it as personal to them as possible to stand
out and show that you’re keen to help them.




                                  194
                       TEN INMAIL SALES TEMPLATES




INMAIL TEMPLATE 10—THE COMPANY FOLLOWER

SUBJECT LINE: I NOTICED YOU’RE FOLLOWING OUR COMPANY

Hey Hannah,


I noticed on LinkedIn today that you’re following our company,
Gong. So, I did a little digging to see if you had worked with us before
and noticed that you did two years ago. I wanted to ask if you’ve con-
sidered working with us again? We’ve had quite a few changes since
then. I’d love to jump on a quick call and show you what’s new. Or
could I email some of them over?


Kind Regards,
Dan


TEMPLATE 10 NOTES: There could be many reasons they follow
your company page—­perhaps they follow the content, or perhaps
they attended a webinar your company ran, etc. Find out first before
using it in the message.




                                  195
      PART 8
FOLLOW UP, REPLIES &
CONVERTING TO SALES




         197
                     CHAPTER 24

  WHAT IF THEY DON’T
       REPLY?




N   o sales strategy works 100% of the time; most work at a relatively
    low conversion percentage. Cold calling tends to yield a 1–4%
success rate, with the majority never turning into anything. With
messaging on LinkedIn, you will get people that don’t reply at all (if
you’ve worked in sales for more than one day, you’ll be used to this!).


So, what happens if they don’t reply?


Let me share a quick story of where this really comes to life.




                                  199
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




I was booked to deliver training with a company. Whilst doing some
final preparation a week before, I noticed someone in my personal
LinkedIn network share a post asking for a recommendation for the
exact same product that the company I was due to train was selling.


I had a good relationship with the director, so I tagged them in the
post, saying that I would personally recommend their company.


The week passed, and the day came when I travelled to deliver their
1-­Day LinkedIn Masterclass. As the team arrived at the training
room, one of the delegates approached me and said they had seen
the post where I tagged their director. They went on to say that they
didn’t believe their director had noticed or reacted to it, so they took
the proactive approach to comment, connect and message the pros-
pect themselves.


“That’s brilliant!” I said. “What happened next?” I asked.


“Well, I’m just waiting for them to reply to my message,” they said. . .


I paused, looking slightly confused. . .


    “I’m sorry, what? You’re WAITING for them to reply?”


The room went silent. . .



                                   200
                         What If They Don’t Reply?




“Yes,” they said, only now starting to doubt their logic.


I went on to explain to them how posts like this easily generate over
100 likes, comments and messages to the prospect. Their LinkedIn
inbox will be FULL of messages from salespeople trying to win their
business. The likelihood of them replying, unfortunately, is often
quite low.


This is one of the biggest missed opportunities in social selling—­
sitting and waiting for replies.


I can guarantee you that at least 80% of the salespeople that comment
on these posts or send LinkedIn messages rarely use other tools as
well. They also just sit there and wait; in fact, there is a chance that as
you’re reading this now, you’ve acknowledged that you fall into that
trap, too. Don’t worry if that’s the case; we all must learn somehow!


And this is where this section comes into play. . .


What if they don’t reply?


Well, if they don’t reply, PICK UP THE PHONE!!


Pick up that wonderful phone and give them a call. Wait, what if
they don’t answer? Well, don’t get me wrong, there is also a very low



                                    201
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




chance that they won’t answer your call. If they don’t answer, send
them an email.


If they don’t reply to your email, send them a letter. Then, after a
few days, give them a call again. Perhaps try and engage with their
content, like a post, write a comment, and let them know that you’re
there. Keep trying as much as you can.


You need to remember one important thing. . .


YOU ARE A SALESPERSON!


Your job is to hunt—­
                    to go out, find, create and close sales
opportunities.


Real salespeople don’t wait around; they try everything in their
power to go out there and help people with their product or service.
So, if your prospect doesn’t reply to your message, don’t wait around.
Start using other platforms that are there at your disposal.




                                  202
                     CHAPTER 25

   PICK UP THE PHONE




Y   es, you are reading this right. A LinkedIn book written by a
    social seller has a chapter called “Pick up the phone”!


I’ve spent over ten years making, training and leading large sales
teams making cold calls. Whilst I now focus on helping salespeople
leverage LinkedIn, I know the power and importance of the phone
and am certainly not scared to pick it up and use it.


There’s an unfortunate stigma in social selling that most social sell-
ers are too scared to pick up the phone and prefer to just hide behind
a computer.




                                 203
                   THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Whilst I don’t doubt there are people out there scared to use the
phone to sell, it’s certainly not just social sellers, nor is social selling
the reason that salespeople don’t use the phone.


It has never been “social selling VERSUS cold calling.” Whilst the
debate rages on in sales, it’s never been about choosing one or the
other. Ultimately, if you choose, you lose.


Here’s a simple truth that I need you to know:


Some of your prospects will ONLY buy from you if you phone them.


Think back to the modern-­day prospecting maze that I showed you
in Chapter 2 and what I said about communication preferences.
There are many people out there who prefer to use the phone—­who
prefer to buy or discuss buying over the phone.


This book will hopefully show you how to leverage LinkedIn mes-
saging to generate opportunities and communicate with prospects
and customers, but it works EVEN better alongside the phone.


You can use LinkedIn messages to arrange phone calls, generate
interest, confirm meetings, send information, follow up, and so
much more.




                                    204
                           Pick Up The Phone




If you fear making cold calls, or if you’re trying to justify that they
don’t work, you don’t like them, or they’re dead, I would take a min-
ute and challenge yourself.


All you’re doing by avoiding using the phone is missing out on a
number of potential customers that will only ever buy from you if
you use the phone.




                                  205
                     CHAPTER 26

        CONVERSATION
       TO OPPORTUNITY




L   inkedIn is by far one of the most effective ways to start a conver-
    sation with a prospect. As you’ve seen in this book, there are four
ways you can message that will help you start conversations with lots
of prospects when done properly.


What is important to remember is that messages on LinkedIn, in any
of their forms, are instant messages. In the B2B world, where what
you sell is probably not a simple transactional purchase, you’ll need
to have quite deep conversations. These can rarely be accomplished
on LinkedIn alone.


                                  207
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




NOTE: It is worth noting that the amount of money people are com-
fortable spending online grows each year, and so the value of sales
that can happen on LinkedIn alone will grow each year as well. I’ve
sold products and services valued between $10,000 and $50,000 via
LinkedIn messages alone, and I anticipate those values will grow.


However, most sales conversations that start on LinkedIn will need to
leave LinkedIn at some point to continue progressing. These usually
progress into an email, phone call, video call or face-­to-­face meeting.


The key is navigating the conversation and, when the time is
right, looking for or creating an opportunity to progress it outside
of LinkedIn.


Assuming you’ve done some level of pre-­qualification and you genu-
inely believe that you can help the person you’re messaging, then
navigating the conversation shouldn’t be too difficult.


It often becomes challenging when you’re messaging a complete
stranger and hoping for the best!


Now, there will be multiple scenarios that you’ll find yourself in
when messaging different prospects. For example, some of you will
go straight to the point with your initial message, so there will be
no need for a fluffy conversation. The message will usually progress
outside of LinkedIn after the first reply (for example, if you’re asking
for a call or an email address to send information).

                                   208
                     Conversation To Opportunity




Other messages will be more conversational, where you will start the
conversation discussing something completely different and focus
more on building rapport.


You’ll then need to look at moving the conversation to one that’s
connected to what you sell and, more importantly, how you think
you might be able to help them.




                                 209
                    PART 9
                BONUS CHAPTERS


I  n the first edition of The Million-­ Pound LinkedIn Message, I
   included several bonus chapters to help provide as many addi-
tional Social Selling, LinkedIn and Sales Navigator tips as possible.
In this updated version, The Ultimate LinkedIn Messaging Guide,
I wanted to add even more so you get AS MUCH value from this
book as possible!


There are tonnes of tips in these seven Bonus Chapters alone that
will help you get more from LinkedIn and social selling alongside
sending super-effective messages.




                                 211
                     CHAPTER 27

         PIPELINE WILL
        ALWAYS BE KING




F  rom the day the first sale was ever made to the day the last sale is
   made, one thing will always remain true. . .


Pipeline will always be KING in sales.


Looking back at my time leading sales teams, one of the main reasons
for a sales rep missing target was because they hadn’t built enough of
a pipeline. If you look back at when you’ve missed your target, how
many times would you have actually hit target if you had generated
a few more opportunities?


                                 213
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Sales pipelines work like this. . .


Let’s say you have to make five sales to hit your sales target. You need
to prospect and build a pipeline of opportunities that you work to
close at least five to hit target.


The problem is it’s not that simple!


Here are some of the common mistakes that salespeople make with
their pipeline:



1) THEY DON’T FIND ENOUGH OPPORTUNITIES TO HIT TARGET

A lot of sales reps don’t generate enough opportunities each month
to hit target. . .


Let’s say you need five sales to hit target, as we mentioned above.
Unfortunately, salespeople fall into a common trap of only building
a pipeline of five opportunities. The reality is that if you build a pipe-
line of five opportunities, not all five opportunities will close. Which
is why many salespeople end up not hitting target.


The key is to understand your close ratio.


If you close 50% of your pipeline, you’ll need 50% more to hit target.
So, to hit five sales, you’ll need at least ten opportunities in your

                                      214
                       Pipeline Will ALWAYS Be KING




pipeline. If you close 25% of your pipeline, you’ll need at least 20
opportunities in order to hit target.


2) THEY LIVE IN PIPELINE DENIAL

Far too many salespeople refuse to accept the reality about their
pipeline. . .

They’ll always tell their sales managers that their sales pipeline is
amazing, but in reality, it’s not. Unfortunately, whilst this attitude will
keep their sales managers off their backs, it rarely results in the sales-
person hitting target and in the long run, often results in the salesper-
son struggling.

Pipeline honesty is key to sales success.

If an opportunity has gone cold, if they’re not responding to you, if
you haven’t fully qualified them, anything that makes the opportu-
nity questionable, take it out of your pipeline. Leaving it there will
only cause problems.


3) THEY CELEBRATE THE OPPORTUNITY OVER THE SALE

Some salespeople make the mistake of celebrating the opportunity
before it becomes a sale. . .

I’ve encountered many sales professionals who make SO MUCH
noise when they generate a sales opportunity. Now, don’t get me

                                    215
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




wrong, I’m all for celebrating in sales at every stage of the ­process.
The problem is that to a lot of sales reps, that’s the peak. They
­celebrate the opportunity so much that they no longer have the drive
 to do the follow-­up work required to close the sale, and what often
 happens is the opportunity goes cold.


Pipeline is king, but closed deals are life.


Build your pipeline up with more than enough opportunities, and
then make sure you put in the hard work to close as many of them
as possible. It’s okay to celebrate creating a new and exciting sales
opportunity, but true success comes the moment the deal is signed
(and the customer is happy!).


4) THEY STOP PROSPECTING WHEN THEY’VE GOT ENOUGH
OPPORTUNITIES

Some salespeople spend ages building their pipeline, or they run out
of leads and then stop. . .


Now I know it’s hard work building a pipeline—­it’s exhausting! All
the efforts required to make loads of calls, send loads of emails,
and send loads of LinkedIn messages, along with everything else,
is draining. So, when you do finally have enough opportunities, it’s
easy to want to focus only on converting those. The problem is that
each time one closes, your pipeline shrinks.



                                   216
                      Pipeline Will ALWAYS Be KING




Building a pipeline is a 24/7/365 thing.


All day, every day, every week, every month, every year; prospecting
and building a pipeline should never stop if you work in sales. The
best sales professionals out there are prospecting all the time and
never stop because they know they need to keep feeding the fun-
nel. For each sale that you close, you need to generate several more
opportunities in order to continue closing sales.


This is why pipeline is KING!


No pipeline = no sales.


It’s not just “Always Be Closing” in sales; it’s also “Always Be Pros-
pecting.” You need to keep that pipeline full and work on adding new
opportunities all the time.


My top tips:


• Qualify, qualify, QUALIFY – Put as much effort into qualifying
  your opportunities to make your pipeline as refined as possible.
  Understand their budget, their timeframe, their urgency, their
  needs, etc. All this information will massively help your pipe-
  line quality.
• Never stop FEEDING your pipeline – Prospect all the time, make
  it a habit, and make it a part of your daily routine. Remember, for



                                  217
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




  each sale you close, you’ll need at least 2–3 new opportunities to
  replace it (as some won’t convert).
• Be HONEST with your sales manager and yourself – Pretending
  that your pipeline is great and you’ll definitely hit target will only
  hold you back. Be honest—­if you need help, ask for it. If you need
  more opportunities, focus on prospecting. If you need help clos-
  ing, ask for it.
• Celebrate your opportunities AND your sales – Creating a new
  sales opportunity is an achievement, so be proud of that! But also
  remember that it’s only part of the process. You need to then work
  on closing the deal to really win.




                                   218
                    CHAPTER 28

   TEN BIG LINKEDIN &
    SALES NAVIGATOR
          TIPS




T   he best part about LinkedIn and Sales Navigator is that every
    single month they are continually evolving new features and new
strategies.


One of the biggest commitments that I made when I started train-
ing LinkedIn & Sales Navigator was to live and breathe it in my own
businesses so that I could always bring the latest training to my
customers.


                                219
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Today, I’m going to share the BIGGEST tips of 2022 thus far and
what is working best right now.


Let’s dig in:


1) SET AN AWAY MESSAGE ON LINKEDIN (SALES NAV TIP)

You will need Sales Navigator or LinkedIn Premium to do this, but
it’s an amazing feature few salespeople are tapping into. It’s your out-­
of-­office auto-­reply but built into your LinkedIn inbox.


Let me give you an example of how I used it recently. After announc-
ing a new position as an advisor for a start-­up SaaS company (and
knowing I would get a lot of congrats messages), I set up the away
message to direct people to the company.


Use it whether you’re on vacation/holiday, when you’ve got a busy
day, or even just as an auto-­response to direct potential customers to
a website, piece of content or resource.


2) ADD A COVER STORY VIDEO TO YOUR LINKEDIN PROFILE
(LINKEDIN TIP)

Even though it’s such a powerful feature, 99% of people that I meet
haven’t done this yet. You can now record a 30-­second video that
will sit within your profile photo. This is a fantastic opportunity to



                                   220
                 TEN BIG LINKEDIN & SALES NAVIGATOR TIPS




tell people who you are and what you, your product or your service
do to help.


BONUS TIP: When people first visit your profile, the cover story
video will play a four-­second preview from the first four seconds of
the video. I’d recommend just smiling and even waving at the camera
for the first four seconds before speaking.


3) SHARE A TESTIMONIAL POST THIS WEEK (LINKEDIN TIP)

Once or twice a month, it is incredibly valuable to share a testimo-
nial post that will show your network (which should include pros-
pects) the value that you’re delivering to customers. This could be
in the form of a testimonial, recommendation, case study, or even a
text post sharing the results or numbers you achieved for one of your
customers.


The key is for this to include REAL numbers, not just a story but
tangible results that people can see. Everyone is claiming they can do
something, but very few actually show evidence of it.


4) MAKE YOUR SUBJECT LINE ON INMAIL ABOUT THEM
(SALES NAV TIP)

When you send an InMail from Sales Navigator to someone you’re
not directly connected with, you’ll need to include a subject line. Just



                                   221
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




like with emails, subject lines have a big impact on whether someone
will open and read your message.


Most salespeople send generic, spammy sales-­like subject lines, and
the secret is to not make the subject line about you but about THEM.


5) KEEP A RECORD OF THE LINKS OF PROSPECTS’ POSTS
(LINKEDIN TIP)

When you are researching prospects, you are likely to find key bits in
their profiles and also within their LinkedIn activity that will be use-
ful for personalisation and conversation. One of the best tips I teach
is to keep records of those findings and posts within your CRM.


I personally use (and recommend using) Pipedrive CRM, and as you
can see in the screenshot, it’s super-easy to keep notes and include




                                   222
                 TEN BIG LINKEDIN & SALES NAVIGATOR TIPS




links and key points that you can use throughout the prospecting
and sales cycle.


(You can try Pipedrive completely free for 30 days here; it’s by far the
best CRM out there.)


6) SEND A VIDEO MESSAGE TO ALL CURRENT PROSPECTS
(LINKEDIN & SALES NAV TIP)

From my experience, having worked with thousands of salespeople
and speaking to C-­Level decision-­makers worldwide, roughly 99%
of salespeople are NOT sending video messages on LinkedIn.


Not only does this make those who do stand out, but because they
are so engaging, they are converting incredibly well. I’d highly rec-
ommend sending a video message to any and every prospect you
haven’t already sent one to. Make sure each one is recorded person-
ally, look at the camera and be genuine.



7) ADD A LINK TO YOUR LINKEDIN PROFILE (LINKEDIN TIP)

A new feature on LinkedIn now allows people to include a clickable
link to their LinkedIn profile. This gives you an amazing opportu-
nity to direct people to your company website, a resource, a webinar,
or anything you think might give them value and start them or pro-
gress them on the journey to hopefully work with you.



                                   223
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




8) START A NEWSLETTER (LINKEDIN TIP)

Again, I try hard to live and breathe everything I teach, and you’re
literally taking part in that right now with this tip! Newsletters are
one of the highest converting forms of content on LinkedIn cur-
rently, which is why I have two and write them regularly.


These are exactly the same as articles published on LinkedIn, but
people can subscribe to them. When someone subscribes to a
newsletter, LinkedIn notifies them each time you share a new one,
helping you reach your target audience more effectively and give
value to them. (Hopefully, you’re getting value from this newslet-
ter today!)


9) SHARE A PHOTO OF YOURSELF TO HELP PEOPLE GET TO KNOW
YOU (LINKEDIN TIP)

Sharing pictures of yourself can be scary at first, but it’s extremely
valuable. You want your audience, prospects and customers to get
to know you. Let them see you at work, let them see you outside of
work, and let them get to know you as a real person, not just another
corporate bot.


It can be anything from a selfie at your desk (home or office) all the
way to a picture on your wedding day (yes, that’s me a few weeks ago
getting married in Florida!).



                                  224
                 TEN BIG LINKEDIN & SALES NAVIGATOR TIPS




10) CHECK YOUR PROFILE VIEWS (SALES NAV TIP)

There is a reality that few salespeople consider: Some of your IDEAL
prospects are viewing your LinkedIn profile, and if you’re not check-
ing, you are missing a HUGE opportunity to speak to them.


With standard LinkedIn, you can see the most recent four or
five, but with Sales Navigator or premium LinkedIn, you can
see ­EVERYONE. Scroll through them daily, look for people that




                                   225
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




match your ideal ­customer persona, and then send them a message
like this:


“Hi Sarah, thank you for taking a look at my profile today! I’d love to
know how your sales team is currently using LinkedIn.”

                                                         Kind Regards,
                                                                 Dan




                                  226
                      CHAPTER 29

  SOCIAL SELLING TOP
         TIPS




1) CREATE YOUR OWN BILLBOARD LINKEDIN PROFILE BANNER

You waste a valuable opportunity if you are not utilising LinkedIn’s
profile banner. Most salespeople either leave it blank or with a bland,
generic or corporate image. The reality is that this is the perfect space
to have your own personal billboard! It’s one of the first things your
prospects will see, and so it’s a great opportunity, in as few words as
possible, to tell them what you offer.




                                   227
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




2) HAVE AN ELEVATOR PITCH STYLE PROFILE SUMMARY

Most of us know the elevator pitch principle: the idea that if you were
in an elevator with a prospect, what would you say in 30 seconds that
would tell them what it is you do and give them a reason to be inter-
ested? Well, your LinkedIn profile summary is now your modern-­
day digital elevator pitch.


It’s often the first thing people will read and learn about you. My top
tip is to make it customer-­focused; don’t write about how great you
are at selling but write about how great you are at helping people.


3) COMMENT ON RELEVANT POSTS EVERY SINGLE DAY

You don’t need to spend more than 5–10 minutes per day comment-
ing on at least 2–3 posts to make an impact. Make sure the posts you
comment on are industry relevant.


Some may be posts shared by your prospects; some may be posts
shared by key industry people or other people that work in your
prospects’ company. Those comments will help build your personal
brand and get your name known to your prospects, making for
warmer introductions.


4) WRITE A POST EVERY SINGLE DAY

This shouldn’t take any more than 5–10 minutes each day but is one
of the quickest and best ways you can build a personal brand and

                                  228
                         Social Selling Top Tips




generate sales opportunities. The posts should be valuable to your
prospects and network. You can tell stories, share experiences, ask
questions or start debates—­use it as an opportunity to give value to
your audience and open the doors to you. Let them see and get to
know you as a real human being.



5) SHARE VIDEOS ON LINKEDIN

Recording and sharing a video on LinkedIn isn’t the easiest thing to
do; trust me, when I started recording videos of myself, it was one of
the toughest things I’ve ever done! I used to hate holding my phone
in front of my face and talking to myself for a few minutes—­it was
even worse watching it afterwards.


However, video is one of the most powerful forms of content on
LinkedIn, and it’s growing every day. Try sharing a few videos each
month, no more than 2–3 minutes each with subtitles/captions, on
valuable content for your prospects.



6) CUSTOMISE YOUR LINKEDIN PROFILE URL

Another super-simple but effective tip is to customise your LinkedIn
profile URL code. When you set up your profile, it will automati-
cally give you a URL that will be full of random numbers and let-
ters, which isn’t easy to share. If you go into your profile and look at
the top right-­hand corner, you should see the option to “Edit Public
Profile & URL.”

                                   229
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Click that, and at the top right-­hand corner of that page, you’ll see
the option to edit your URL. For example, mine is: www.linkedin
.com/in/danieldisney.


7) ADD A LINK TO YOUR PROFILE IN YOUR EMAIL SIGNATURE

This is such a simple but powerful tip. Add a link to your LinkedIn
profile to your email signature. You can just write the link in, or it’s
pretty easy to add in a LinkedIn logo that links through (just search
Google for LinkedIn email signature).


It means that everyone you email (which I’m sure are tonnes of
­people!) will be directed to your profile. This will help you grow your
 audience and potentially help you grow relationships with prospects
 and customers.




                                   230
                     CHAPTER 30

   BUILDING A STRONG
    LINKEDIN PROFILE




M    ost salespeople when going into a customer-­facing environ-
     ment, whether it’s a face-­to-­face meeting, a skype call or a net-
working event, will dress as smart as possible.


They’ll put on nice suits, dresses, shoes, jewellery, accessories, hair,
make-­up, etc. They’ll make a significant effort to look their best for
their prospects or customers to make a good impression.


What you don’t see is business and sales professionals have the same
attitude towards their social profiles.


                                  231
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




We now have both a physical and DIGITAL presence to consider. We
not only have to look presentable physically but we should apply that
same logic to our digital presence—­our social media profiles and
personal brands.


Here’s a little doodle I did to illustrate it. . .




The reality is that there are probably more prospects and customers
looking at your social profiles than looking at you face-­to-­face. Your
social profile should look as good as you do, and you should invest
just as much time as you would in your physical appearance.


With that in mind, here are the basic steps necessary to create a
strong LinkedIn profile:


Before we jump into each section, one thing to always remember
with your LinkedIn profile is to think about your target audience.

                                      232
                    Building A Strong LINKEDIN PROFILE




If you’re trying to get a job, for example, then your profile should
be all about why someone should interview or employ you. If you’re
looking to prospect and sell through LinkedIn, then your profile
needs to be all about the value you offer.


The way to look at it is to imagine your dream prospect visiting your
page right now. What would you want them to see to feel comfort-
able talking to and potentially buying from you? Every part of your
profile should be built to help your prospect get to know and trust
you to then give you the opportunity to progress that relationship.


Let’s break down each section of your LinkedIn profile. . .


Profile Photo: Let’s start with one of the most important components of
your profile: your profile picture. I’ve seen some great and not-­so-­great
ones over the years. I know it’s not always easy finding a suitable smart
photo to use, which is why I often see photos from weddings (often the
last time a nice photo was taken when you were dressed smartly!).


The reality is that most people reading this now have a smartphone
with a pretty powerful camera, so next time you’re in the office, get a
colleague to take a decent headshot against a plain background, and
boom, perfect profile picture!


Background Image: Behind your profile photo is space for a back-
ground image to be loaded. Please don’t ignore this part; it’s fine to
choose a plain background or upload a generic one, but you can
                                    233
                    THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




create a custom one for free using Canva (www.canva.com). You can
include your company logo or mission statement or even your con-
tact details. Something that looks smart, looks on-­brand, and cap-
tures attention.


Headline: The next step is the headline. This is often just populated
with your job title, which is fine; however, you can be a little more
creative and make it more about what you do or what you can offer.
For me, I use LinkedIn to grow my personal brand, so my headline
talks about me, but you might want to discuss what you offer or a
reason or how you can help your target customer.


Summary Section: This section is your opportunity to give a nice
elevator pitch summary of you, what you do and what you can offer.
Mine highlights a summary about me, what I can offer, achieve-
ments that help prove my ability to deliver and my contact details.
I realise your contact details are available on your profile, but you
should want them to be as clear as possible, so popping them into the
summary box helps make them even more visible.


 TOP TIP: You can attach media to your summary and work experience. This can be
 an image, blog, video, website, presentation or link and is a great way to provide
 some extra media, highlighting what you offer.



Articles & Activity: This will show all your activity, as in posts you
like, comment on, or share. This section will also show the articles/
blogs that you write on LinkedIn. This is another place your prospect

                                        234
                   Building A Strong LINKEDIN PROFILE




may look, so it’s important to be aware of what content you like and
how you engage as your prospects may see it.


Work Experience: This section is for you to list your past and cur-
rent work experience. Less is often more in these sections, but give
your prospect the opportunity to see what experience you have and
how it may relate to your ability to provide value to them.


This is also a good place to include a little more about your cur-
rent company and what makes it different/unique. There is also the
ability to add media, so you can link the company website, include
your sales pitch presentation or a video—­any media that will help
the prospect buy into what you do.


Featured Skills & Endorsements: This is one of the real stand-­out
features of LinkedIn as both a fantastic recruitment platform and
a fantastic sales platform. In this section, potential buyers can see
areas where you are endorsed by other people.


For example, if you were selling software and your prospect could
see you were endorsed for “Software,” “Account Management,” “Cus-
tomer Service,” etc., by plenty of people, it helps them feel more com-
fortable buying from you.


Recommendations: Taking it one step further, not only can people
endorse you for skills, but they can write a full personal recommen-
dation! Imagine again that you’re selling software and your prospect
visits your profile, seeing there are several recommendations from
                                  235
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




other software companies talking about how much you helped them,
saved them money, listened to them, etc.


 TOP TIP: Just as I’m sure you’ll have a referral process in place to get referrals and
 case studies from your customers, create one to get recommendations on your
 LinkedIn profile, as they are just as powerful.



Accomplishments: This is a great opportunity to list any courses,
certifications or awards that you’ve received. Again, imagine your
prospect viewing your profile and being able to see what you are
qualified in. It adds some real power to how you are seen.


Interests: You might not think this would interest a prospect, but
imagine they looked at this part and saw that you were interested
in key industry companies or pages. It would show them that you’re
interested in what they are interested in.


EXTRA Quick Profile Tips
• Keep it up to date; make sure you’re updating it regularly.
• Create a simple, personalised link for your LinkedIn profile.
• Add that link to your email signature.
• Include the link on your business cards.

Follow these tips, fill in each section, make sure it flows nicely and
looks professional, and at every stage, make sure you think about how
your customer will feel reading it. Will it scare them off, or will it
make them want to talk to you and feel comfortable buying from you?

                                          236
                      CHAPTER 31

COLD CALLING IS LIKE
   BLOCKBUSTER




I ’ve talked a bit about cold calling in this book, and hopefully, you’ll
  see that I’m very pro–cold calling, unlike some social sellers who
take an anti–cold calling approach.


So, why Blockbuster? Is it because it went bust? Am I saying cold
calling is dead? NO!


Actually, in my opinion, Blockbuster should still be alive and thriv-
ing today in the same way that a lot of cold callers are thriving.




                                   237
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




What Blockbuster highlights is change and how refusing to change
or adapt is a risky way to approach business. Blockbuster ended as
a business because it didn’t adapt quickly enough to evolve with the
rest of the industry. Whilst new businesses were coming up with
streaming services, which were growing fast, Blockbuster refused to
adapt and kept pushing the “film rental” market.


Technology advanced, and people were able to watch films on
demand—­when they wanted with no late fees!


Now, if Blockbuster had adapted and launched a streaming service,
they could still be going (and growing) today. Blockbuster had a
huge brand known all over the world for films, and they could have
easily built and grown a streaming brand in the same way Netflix
has. They could have kept the stores going as people still like to shop
and would still rent newly released movies that aren’t available on
Netflix or streaming sites.


This is EXACTLY the situation that cold calling is in right now!


Cold calling is a prospecting activity that thrived when the phone
was our main source of communication. Just like Blockbuster thriv-
ing when the only way we could watch films was to buy or rent them
via video or DVD.


The same way the world of streaming and downloading interrupted
the film industry, other forms of communication, such as social

                                  238
                     Cold Calling Is Like Blockbuster




media, instant messaging, email and video, are now interrupting the
prospecting and sales industry.


If you refuse to adapt and evolve, if you think the phone will always be
the main form of communication and that nothing will change, there is
a high probability that you will end up like Blockbuster—­out of business.


I’m not saying that the phone will die. Like I said at the start, peo-
ple still buy and watch DVDs in the same way people still use and
will continue to use the phone for years to come. However, people
are now communicating more via social media, instant messaging,
email and video. Now is the time to adapt to these new methods,
learn them properly and master them.


Blockbuster, Toys “R” Us, it’s the same story. . .


In the UK a few weeks ago, it was announced that Toys “R” Us, a
popular toy shop, was closing down. Most people jump on this to
blame websites such as Amazon, which certainly contributes to this.


However, in the same way Blockbuster could still be thriving today,
so could Toys “R” Us! If they had adapted to the changing way that
people buy and embraced the online world of purchasing, they could
still be thriving.


The salespeople and sales teams that embrace social selling, email,
messaging and video are thriving today. They’ve grown their
                                   239
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




pipelines, increased their sales and grown their businesses. Suddenly,
they’re able to reach more people and have more conversations.


What should you do?


If you are ONLY cold calling, now is the time to really wake up to
the fact that this is not a strong sales strategy. You’re missing out
on loads of opportunities to generate sales via social media, email,
video and instant message. It’s not about replacement but utilising it
ALONGSIDE cold calling.


The phone will continue to be a strong source of prospecting, but
there are A LOT of people using or who are more responsive to other
platforms. Be smart, be proactive and use them all!




                                  240
                    CHAPTER 32

  SOCIAL SELLING IN
 15 MINUTES PER DAY




S  alespeople are busy. Fact.


Between making hundreds of cold calls, attending countless team
meetings, sending emails, sending proposals, closing deals, over-
coming objections, and the list goes on they are indeed busy!


When you then have people telling you that you should be social
selling now as well, where on earth are you going to find the time
to do that?!


                                241
                  THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Are you really supposed to spend hours each day on LinkedIn?


Luckily, the answer is no!


In this chapter, I want to show you how you can achieve social selling
results in as little as just 15 minutes each day. Surely everyone read-
ing this can find 15 minutes each day. Especially if those 15 minutes
have the potential to generate you MORE sales?


  But Dan, there’s no way I can achieve anything in just 15 minutes!


I actually mentioned this on a webinar recently, and a couple of the
attendees pushed back and said that wasn’t possible. Don’t get me
wrong; if you can and want to invest more time into social selling,
you’ll obviously have the opportunity to generate more results.


However, as many salespeople and sales leaders are often crazy-busy
as it is, I wanted to find a way that, with as little time as possible,
they could find a better way to leverage LinkedIn and start generat-
ing results.


Let me show you how. . .


To really see results, I’ve broken the 15 minutes into three five-­minute
activities. To see results, the activities need to occur on a regular,
consistent daily basis. That’s part of why this works.

                                    242
                   Social Selling In 15 Minutes Per Day




1 – Grow Your Network (Five minutes)

The first stage is to start growing your network each and every day.
Spend the first five minutes adding potential prospects, adding
­people within prospective companies or adding people relevant to
 your industry. LinkedIn automatically recommends people for you,
 or you can do a couple of quick searches.


If you can add at least ten connections each day, that’s 300 each
month and 3,600 in a year. If you’re slowly filling your network with
prospects, you’ll then increase the chance of generating inbound
enquiries, plus you’ll create the opportunity to start outbound con-
versations with them via messaging.


2 – Share & Create Content (Five minutes)

Five minutes isn’t a lot of time in the world of content, but it’s enough
to start. My advice is to subscribe to as many industry-­relevant chan-
nels as possible. This way, every day you’ll get the latest industry
news direct to your inbox. Finding a good article and clicking the
LinkedIn icon to share takes a couple of minutes, plus adding your
own thoughts takes you up to five.


Creating a nice post can easily be done in five minutes. Whether it’s
a quick photo of yourself in a specific location with some writing
attached, a quick story, some insight or even a short three-­minute
video, you can easily create something impactful in five minutes. My
advice is to share two bits of news and create three posts each week.

                                   243
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




By sharing content every day, you’ll first start to build a personal
brand. Done right, your content has the potential to generate
inbound leads, and you have the opportunity to use the engagement
or content to start conversations with prospects.


3 – Social Post Engagement (Five minutes)

The final five minutes should be invested in social engagement. This
includes everything from liking a few posts to commenting on a
few posts. This should be a mixture of engaging your prospects’ con-
tent but also industry-­relevant content.


The aim is to make sure your name is out there every day. By engag-
ing on your prospects’ posts you’ll earn credibility, build rela-
tionships and hopefully generate opportunities. By engaging in
industry-­relevant posts, you’ll start to build your personal brand,
which will be noticed by prospects and peers.


And there it is, three simple five-­minute activities, just 15 minutes
per day, that, done regularly, have the potential to generate some
pretty rewarding results.


Now you could spend 20 minutes a day, 30 minutes, or more. The
key is to make sure you’re INVESTING and not wasting that time.




                                  244
                       CHAPTER 33

 THE ABC’S OF SOCIAL
       SELLING




T   he movie, “Glengarry Glen Ross” featuring Alec Baldwin, cre-
    ated the now-popular sales phrase:


    “Always Be Closing”


His speech to motivate the team to stop waiting around for sales and
instead focus on getting them the buy has helped plenty of sales pro-
fessionals over the years. This was actually a very effective approach
in the past, where selling required more push.


To be fair, closing sales is still a big part of sales success.

                                     245
                 THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




Unless you close the sale, there is no sale; everything else means
nothing until the deal is done. However, the way we close and, in
fact, the way we sell has changed over the years.


Part of that change includes the introduction of social media into the
sales process.


Social Selling is quite simply the effective use of social media in the
sales process. Sales professionals can use social media to find, con-
nect and communicate with prospects and customers in the same
way they might use the phone, email or face-­to-­face.


With people now spending more time on social media every day, it
has become a crucial platform to help salespeople reach more people
and enhance the way they sell.


There are key fundamentals to achieving success with social selling.
Many salespeople spend a great deal of time on social without gen-
erating many, if any, results. It’s the same as those sales profession-
als who don’t know how to cold call effectively, making hundreds of
calls every day with no results in the end.


The key is to learn how to do it properly.


To help, here are the ABC’s of Social Selling that focus on the core
fundamentals:


                                  246
                           The ABC’s Of Social Selling




1) Always Be Connecting

The first ABC of Social Selling is to Always Be Connecting. Effec-
tive social selling comes from your ability to find and connect with
potential prospects and customers. The more prospects and custom-
ers that you have in your network, the more opportunities you’ll
have to generate in the short and long term.


 Top Tip: There are many great methods for prospect searching on LinkedIn, but
 when actually connecting with people, it’s often worth making the effort with
 your LinkedIn connection request. Nothing too sales-­rich, just simple and light.
 To bring this tip to life, set yourself a goal to connect with X amount of new
 people every single day. It could be five; it could be ten. Whichever number
 works for you.


2) Always Be Creating Content

The second ABC is to Always Be Creating Content. Successful social
sellers create engaging and great personal content to share with their
network of prospects and customers. Their content helps showcase
their expertise, build trust and start the all-­important sales con-
versations.


 Top Tip: Your content shouldn’t be about your product but should be about YOU and
 your thoughts/knowledge/expertise. Create content such as posts, blogs, videos and
 images that offer value, insight and knowledge, which then draws people to your
 profile and website, where you can leverage that to start conversations.



                                         247
                     THE ULTIMATE LINKEDIN MESSAGING GUIDE




3) Always Be (Starting) Conversations

One of the most important fundamentals and ABC number three is
to Always Be (Starting) Conversations. Social media is fun and likes
and followers make us feel popular and important. But they certainly
don’t equate to pipelines and revenue until you turn them into REAL
conversations that become meetings, pitches and presentations.


  Top Tip: When you share great content and you get likes and comments, use them
  to start conversations via messenger. It might be a thank-you or an opportunity to
  further discuss the topic. If they are qualified prospects, those conversations can
  then potentially be worked into sales conversations.


4) Always Be Consistent

The last ABC is to Always Be Consistent. Social Selling success comes
from this on a daily basis. For example, if you only cold call someone
once and they don’t answer, that’s it. It’s the same if you participate in
some social activity but then don’t for a period of time—­the results won’t
come. You need to build it into your sales process and do it every day.


  Top Tip: Set time aside every single day to do social selling activities. You could
  devote 15–30 minutes at the start of your day to connect with people, send mes-
  sages and write a post. You may then touch base at lunchtime to do the same and
  again at the end of the day. Set your calendar to ensure that time is focused on
  socials.



And there they are, my ABC’s of Social Selling!

                                         248
                      The ABC’s Of Social Selling




PLEASE LEAVE AN AMAZON REVIEW!

I truly hope that you have enjoyed reading this book and that you’re
able to use it to generate more results from LinkedIn.


If you did enjoy it, I would be extremely grateful if you could spare
five minutes to write a review on Amazon. It would be a huge help
to me and would also help The Ultimate LinkedIn Messaging Guide
reach as many people as possible.


As a thank-you, if you are able to spare some time and write a quick
review, I would love to send you some recorded LinkedIn training
webinars and some LinkedIn eBooks that I share with my customers.


Simply pop me an email at danieldisney@thedailysales.net with a
screenshot, and I’ll send them straight across.


Thank you!




                                  249
 WORKING WITH DANIEL
       DISNEY



I  f you, your business or your sales team want to increase the num-
   ber of leads and sales that they generate from LinkedIn, then Dan-
iel is the man to call.


INTERNATIONAL KEYNOTE SPEAKER

Daniel Disney is one of the most in-­demand and award-­winning
sales speakers, bringing unrivalled energy and passion to the stage,
and inspiring audiences around the world. Daniel lights up stages




FIGURE 3

                                 251
                       Working with Daniel Disney




at sales kick-­offs, corporate sales events, expos and business confer-
ences, as well as delivering highly engaging virtual talks and keynotes.
By leveraging modern, social, and digital sales tactics to improve and
increase sales, Daniel motivates and inspires businesses, sales leaders
and salespeople.


   “Dan lit up the stage, delivering an outstanding, power-­packed
   keynote presentation full of enthusiasm and passion about the
   amazing potential when using LI properly for social selling. He
   explained the WHY and the opportunity everyone was missing by
   not doing it, and he broke it down into easy-­to-­understand con-
   cepts for our global sales team and distribution partners, represent-
   ing 35 countries.”


  Jim Skelly—VP International Sales at Cambro


Daniel delivers a variety of talks on LinkedIn on Social Selling,
Digital Selling, Personal Branding, Sales Motivation, Sales Leader-
ship and more.



LinkedIn, SOCIAL SELLING, SALES NAVIGATOR & PERSONAL
BRANDING TRAINING

Daniel Disney is one of the world’s leading LinkedIn and social sell-
ing trainers. He helps businesses and sales teams leverage LinkedIn
and social media to their full potential as a lead-­generating and
sales-­generating machine.
                                  252
                      Working with Daniel Disney




His hugely popular 3-­to 12-­    month social selling programmes,
LinkedIn & Sales Navigator Bootcamps and Masterclasses have been
delivered to FTSE 500 companies and SMEs all around the world.
They cover all aspects of social/digital selling, helping teams to mas-
ter LinkedIn and to begin generating more results from it.


Daniel also delivers Personal Branding Workshops and Content
Masterclasses, as well as offers LIVE Virtual Training and an On-­
Demand Online LinkedIn Course.


Consulting & Advising

Working with Founders, C-­level executives, business owners, authors
and experts, Daniel provides consulting and advisory services, help-
ing you and your business become the top on LinkedIn.


For more details, head to www.danieldisney.online, or to enquire
about Daniel speaking at your next event or training you or your
team, email danieldisney@thedailysales.net.




                                  253
                          Working with Daniel Disney




WHAT DANIEL’S CUSTOMERS SAY:

After reading Dan’s book, I was so excited about everything he explained about
        social selling that I bought 25 copies for our key sales managers.


    I was convinced about Dan’s best practices on social selling that he lays out
 perfectly in his book. Sending the book out to the sales team didn’t get the "buy-
­in" or adoption that I was hoping for, so I hired Dan to give a one-­hour keynote
  speech at our 2020 International Sales Meeting that was held in January in the
                                    Philippines.


Dan lit up the stage, delivering an outstanding, power-­packed keynote presenta-
tion full of enthusiasm and passion about the amazing potential when using LI
properly for social selling. He explained the WHY and the opportunity everyone
   was missing by not doing it, and he broke it down into easy-­to-­understand
  concepts for our global sales team and distribution partners, representing 35
                                     countries.


On the second day of the meeting, Dan went deeper and taught four one-­hour,
hands-­on workshops to get everyone comfortable with the opportunities on LI.
  He successfully eliminated the fear factor, built confidence, and explained the
  ABCs of proper social selling, best practices, Dos and Don’ts and the impor-
 tance of taking consistent daily action. He was well worth the investment, and
I believe he convinced 120 international salespeople to get on board with social
 selling. We will be hiring Dan again this summer to teach another class to our
                     EMEA sales team, so nobody backslides.


             Jim Skelly—Vice President of International Sales,
                        Cambro Manufacturing




                                       254
                          Working with Daniel Disney




                     I cannot praise Daniel highly enough.


  Daniel’s Social Selling Masterclass was an extremely useful learning exercise
 for our team. He had extensive knowledge of possible techniques that could be
applied to our business and provided exceptionally detailed training and insight
      on social selling, which we were able to put into practice immediately.


 Daniel’s attitude and personality were exemplary. He displayed a good knowl-
edge of the subject and built up a rapport with the attendees in no time. Daniel
was a brilliant tutor, had an excellent quality of delivery, a depth of knowledge
and also communicated really well with all delegates. Pacing, delivery and pas-
          sion for the subject and level of knowledge were/are excellent.


Our team thoroughly enjoyed this course and learned a great deal from the day
                             spent at our HQ.


   We thought the Masterclass was worth every penny and will certainly use
                                him again.


Thank you again, Daniel, and keep up the great work you’re doing in this space.


                      Tim Johnson—CSO at Visualsoft


      Daniel spent the day with our sales, marketing, product, and IT teams
     and delivered his LinkedIn training course, which was even better than
  I ­anticipated! Daniel connects with his audience, tailors his content to suit,
 and even managed to perfectly engage a US team member who attended via
                                   video chat.




                                       255
                          Working with Daniel Disney




  Daniel’s knowledge, experience and overall approach work impeccably well.
  I would recommend Daniel to anyone wanting to understand the power of
socials, and I’d encourage you NOT to reserve his expertise to just sales as “eve-
                             ryone works in sales!”


             Luke Warren—Chief Executive Officer at Kinetic


  If Social Selling is your game, then Daniel Disney is the name you need to
 know!! A fantastically engaging and insightful workshop. Daniel really knows
                       how to help you get the most from it!


Every member of our team got something worthwhile from it, and within days,
we have all been trying new techniques and venturing into the seemingly scary
         world of blogs and vlogs (it’s not as scary as it first seems!)


 I cannot rate Daniel’s workshop highly enough, and it is a must for anybody
             looking to improve their social media performance.


            Gavin Dawson—Managing Director at CamAce Ltd


   I would thoroughly recommend Daniel and his sessions on social selling. I
recently attended one of his sessions and, since then, have seen a huge improve-
                        ment in my use of social media.


After a few tentative attempts at interesting and engaging posts, I seemed to hit
 a note with people and had over 4000 views on a simple picture. I don’t have
anywhere near 4000 connections. My profile views jumped by over 700%, and I
                      have had many connection requests.




                                       256
                          Working with Daniel Disney




               Graham Cameron – Barclay Communications


I recently attended Daniel’s "Social Selling Masterclass." Daniel has been there,
   seen it, done it! His workshop was excellent, with his incredible experience
   and insights shared alongside dispelling some common myths about social
                                  media selling.


  Daniel’s enthusiasm, energy and experience were apparent during the day. I
 have implemented the learnings, and results are coming in (on some prospects
                 that I’ve been targeting for over nine months!)


If you get the chance to attend this workshop, you will not regret the investment.
  Daniel is one of the best social media experts I’ve had the pleasure of meeting
                                 and working with.


  Ian Beighton – Senior Vice President Business Development and Sales
                           EMEA at Innovecs


I first met Daniel at the Sales Innovation Expo and had the pleasure of working
with him as he was a Keynote Speaker for my show, and his Keynote was one of
                          the most attended of the show.


His dedication and diligence to his profession are a testament to the company he
     has built from scratch. I feel I have learned a lot from him in regard to
  Social Selling and look at him as being at the forefront of the Social Selling
                                     Revolution.


              Gavin Harris – Director of B2B Marketing Expo




                                       257
                          Working with Daniel Disney




   I have been following Daniel for years, soaking up all his content published
  on LinkedIn. When he wrote his first book, I bought it immediately and saw
success very quickly. I recently contacted Daniel to run a Social Selling Master-
  class for Fivetran. From the first contact, he was a pleasure to deal with. Our
BDRs & AEs got so much value from this session. Although it was online due to
covid, Daniel’s enthusiasm and delivery had us engaged from the first minute. I
would highly recommend Daniel to any sales/business development leader who
 cares about social selling! Thank you, Daniel! (The book delivery was an extra
                                   special touch!)


 Alison McCabe – Director of Business Development EMEA at Fivetran




                                      258
   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS




T  here is a great quote:


   “If the people around you don’t lift you up, then you don’t have a
   circle of friends, you have a cage.”
                                                        —­ Unknown


I am very fortunate to have amazing people around me who have
helped me throughout my life, and I work hard to make sure I sur-
round myself with the best people that I can. I’d like to acknowl-
edge them as being influential in everything I do now and in writing
this book.


Firstly, I want to thank my amazing wife, Laurie. I wouldn’t be
who I am today or be doing what I do if it wasn’t for you. Lau-
rie helped me years ago and keeps my ego in check. Working and

                                259
                          Acknowledgements




being successful in sales and entering the world of social media can
have a huge impact on your ego. Laurie has helped me remember
what’s important in life and the importance of keeping grounded.
Whilst it is important to celebrate success and be proud of your
achievements, success isn’t a destination, it’s a journey. I would like
to say a big thank-you to our two wonderful sons, too, Joshua and
Lewis. Everything I do, I do for you both. To try and provide you
with opportunities that I didn’t have, to provide you with experi-
ences and memories, to help you as much as I physically can to set
up a good future for you. I am so immensely proud of the men you
are both becoming, and thank you for being a constant source of
motivation for me.


I’d also like to say thank you to my nan and grandad, two of the
biggest inspirations in my life. They taught me the importance of
hard work and determination and the importance of family. I spent
a lot of my childhood with them, and they were the centrepiece of
our family. They worked so hard throughout their lives to provide
for their children and their grandchildren. Every day I work hard to
build a future for my family as they did for theirs.


To my dad, who taught me both humour and creativity. My dad is
the best artist that I know and pushed me to be creative as often
as I can. He also has the best sense of humour, and bringing those
together with my passion for sales helped me create and build The
Daily Sales.



                                  260
                         Acknowledgements




To my mum, for when you would listen to me as a child talk about
my many dreams of starting my own businesses and being success-
ful. You listened, you challenged, and you guided me.


To my Uncle Al and Auntie Kim, for how you have always pushed
me to be the best I can be. Uncle Al, you will always be the person
who guided me into sales and supported me through my early sales
roles. I wouldn’t have achieved the success I have in sales were it
not for you.


To my sister Yasmin, for how you’ve always inspired me to dream big
but always have fun along the way. No matter what, you’ve always
been there, as I will always be for you.


To Nikki and Geoff, for how you took me into the family from day
one and have been supportive and guiding in helping me achieve my
dreams of building my business. Thank you for being there for me,
Laurie, and the boys, and thank you for the holidays and roasts.


To my best friend, Croly. Your entrepreneurial aspirations inspired
me when we were just 16 and running our own little eBay businesses.
We’ve shared successes, failures, laughs and many, many memories.


Thank you as well to Annie and the team at Wiley for all your sup-
port and help during the writing of this book.



                                261
                          Acknowledgements




I’d also like to say a big thank-you to the amazing people I’m hon-
oured to have in my professional circle as my peers, colleagues and
as my friends: Chris Murray, Dale Dupree, Alex Goldfayn, Gavin
Ingham, Steve Burton, Karen Dunne-­Squire, Darryl Praill, Benja-
min Dennehey, Devin Reed, Niraj Kapur, Alison Edgar, Stu Hei-
necke, Scott Barker, Mark Jung, Paul Fifield, Ben Wright, Jim Skelly,
Jeb Blount, Tony J Hughes, Will Barron, Holly Tripp, Tyler Lessard,
Zoe Pepper, Lee Bartlett, Tony Goodchild, James Ski, Ian Gribble,
Tony Morris, Vedran & Mirela, Scott McNicholas, Nazma Qurban,
Ed Armishaw, Shane Burchett, and everyone else that I can’t fit in
(but who hopefully know who they are!)




FINALLY, THANK YOU TO YOU, THE READER.

Thank you for buying this book, and thank you for reading it. I not
only hope you enjoyed it but that it helps you get more from LinkedIn.


Please feel free to follow me on LinkedIn & Twitter for regular con-
tent on LinkedIn, Social Selling and Sales:


LinkedIn: https://uk.linkedin.com/in/danieldisney


Twitter: @thedandisney




                                 262
                          Acknowledgements




If you have any questions at all, please feel free to email me at con-
tact@thedailysales.net.


Happy Social Selling!




                                 263
          RECOMMENDED
             READING



L isted below are a few Social Selling and Sales books that I highly
  recommend:




TOP SOCIAL SELLING BOOKS

 COMBO Prospecting, Tony J Hughes
 Social Selling Master, Jamie Shanks
 Social Selling, Timothy Hughes
 LinkedIn Unlocked, Melonie Dodaro
 The LinkedIn Sales Playbook, Brynne Tillman




                                265
                        Recommended Reading




TOP SALES BOOKS

 The Extremely Successful Salesman’s Club, Chris Murray
 The No.1 Best Seller, Lee Bartlett
 Sales EQ, Jeb Blount (and every other Jeb Blount sales book—­
 they’re all incredible)
 The Only Sales Guide You’ll Ever Need, Anthony Iannarino
 The Sales Bible, Jeffrey Gitomer
 GAP Selling, Keenan
 To Sell Is Human, Daniel Pink
 The Perfect Close, James Muir
 The Sales Development Playbook, Trish Bertuzzi
 High Profit Prospecting, Mark Hunter
 The 10X Rule, Grant Cardone
 Selling From The Heart, Larry Levine
 Everybody Works In Sales, Niraj Kapur
 Secrets Of Successful Sales, Alison Edgar
 Sales Success Stories, Scott Ingram




                                 266
                                    INDEX


1-­Day LinkedIn Masterclass, 200                  Thoughtful Gift, The, 139
                                                  tone, focus, 126
A                                               Audio voice notes
Account management, audio voice notes             basics, 141–146
         (usage), 128                             duration, maximum, 126
Allen, Holly, 141                                 effectiveness, 128
Always Be Connecting, 247                         emphasis, 130
Always Be Consistent, 248                         follow-­up message, potential, 126
Always Be (Starting) Conversations, 248           inflection, consideration, 130
Always Be Creating Content, 247                   pace, control, 130
Approaches, variation, 53                         personalisation, 144
Audio voice messages                              relevance, importance, 129, 131
   advice, 126–127                                sales scripts, 133
   brevity, importance, 126                       script
   cold call follow-­up, 138                         creation, 143
   Cold Call, The, 138                               straight reading, usage, 145
   content, control, 127                          sending
   Content Reference, The, 135–136                   process, 125
   Event Invite, The, 137                            timing, 128
   Expert Article, The, 138                       tone, importance, 129, 130–131
   Free Offer, The, 137                           usage, 24, 121
   goals, 134                                   Audit, value, 137
   number, control, 127                         Automation tools, 171–172
   opportunities, 127–128                       Auto-­response, usage, 220
   Planted Seed script, 134                     Away message, setting, 220
   practice, importance, 126
   Profile Research, 134–135                    B
   Real ROI Example, 136                        Background image, usage, 233
   Referral, 135                                Best-­Mitchell, Jarrod, 169
   sending, 123–124                             Billboard LinkedIn profile banner, creation, 227



                                          267
                                               Index




Blog                                                    request, problems, 52
   sharing, 110                                         validity, ensuring, 100
   writing, 90                                          video message, sending (reason), 170
                                                      Content
C                                                       creation, 16, 243–244, 247
Calendar Link, 44f                                      research, 29–30
Call to action (CTA), 184                               sharing, 16, 23, 164–165, 243–244
Capcut, usage, 173                                         engagement, opportunity, 110
Cards on the Table (message), usage, 97–98                 referencing, 99
Case Study Introduction (message)                       value, sharing, 113
   document, attachment (possibility), 92             Content Reference, The
   usage, 91–92                                         audio message script, 135–136
C-­level prospects, ROI introduction (usage), 86        video sales message script, 164–165
Clients                                               Conversation
   achievement, proposal, 104                           creation, 113
   post, recognition/compliment, 105–106                navigation, 208
   potential ROI, display, 92–93                      Conversation, initiation, 72
   reply, absence (reaction), 199                       content, sharing, 113
   thoughts/knowledge/experience, asking, 90            opportunities, research, 30
Closed deals, importance, 216                           purpose, 79–80
Close ratio, understanding, 214–215                     question, 46
Closing, audio voice notes (usage), 128               Conversation-­starting script, 136
Cold calls/calling, 9, 110, 237                       Cover story video, addition, 218–219
   admission/honesty, 101
   avoidance, 77                                      D
   Blockbuster, comparison, 238                       Decision-­makers
   follow-­up, audio voice message (usage), 138         attention, absence, 110
   leveraging, 82–83                                    busyness, 118
   LinkedIn InMails, comparison, 67–68                  cold call, usage, 66
   problems, 10–11                                      difficulty, 67
   prospecting activity, 238                            emails, arrival/numbers, 93
   receiving, 143                                       LinkedIn location, 67
   sales strategy, weakness, 240                        message, reading, 73
   social selling, contrast, 77, 204                    phone communication, preference, 80
   success rate, 199                                    printed material, impact, 95
   usage, 65                                            senior decision-­makers, ROI introduction
      fear, 205                                                (usage), 86
   variation, 59                                      Demo Offer (message), usage, 92–93
Cold Call, The (audio message script), 138            Did You Get My Letter? (message),
Cold emails, avoidance, 77                                     usage, 102–103
COMBO Prospecting (Hughes), 78                        Digital presence, 232
Communication                                         Digital sellers, digital customer needs, 80
   method, 9                                          Direct message, sending (connection,
   platforms, plethora, 7–8                                    requirement), 68
Company Follower, The (InMail sales                   Direct Profile View (message), usage, 109
          template), 195
Congratulations message, usage, 155, 162              E
Connection                                            eBook, offer/value, 95–96, 137
   Always Be Connection, 247                          Effort, showing, 114
   message, personalisation, 56                       Ego boost, 164–165

                                                   268
                                                 Index




Elevator pitch style profile summary, usage, 228     Honesty (message)
Emails, 239                                            Cards on the Table message, comparison, 101
   boxes, bombardment, 143                             usage, 101–102
   follow-­up email, usage, 136                      Honesty, power, 98, 103
   prospecting emails, sending, 122                  Hughes, Tony J., 78
   reply (absence), letter (sending), 202
   signature, profile link (addition), 230           I
   usage, 75, 110                                    Inbound leads, 15
Engagement                                              generation, 14
   social post engagement, 244                       Industry groups
   social selling, 56–57                                creation, 99
Engagement Thank You (message), usage, 109–111          joining, value, 99
Event Invitation (message)                           Industry research document, offering
   shortness, advantage, 94                                   (opportunity), 94
   usage, 93–94                                      Industry whitepaper, company usage, 90
Event Invite, The (audio message script), 137        Information
Events                                                  gathering, 90
   attendance, importance, 112                          loading, avoidance, 74–75
   search, 137                                       InMails
Expert Article, The                                     cold calls, comparison, 67–68
   InMail sales template, 185–186                       content, aim, 184
Expert Article, The (audio message script), 138         messages, 179
Expert Insight, The (video sales message                   contrast, 51–53
         script), 165–166                                  responses, 173
Eye contact, importance, 166                            subject lines, 183
                                                           usage, 221–222
F                                                       usage, payment/disadvantage, 180
Facebook, usage, 167                                 InMail sales templates, 185
Face-­to-­face interaction, 89                          Company Follower, The, 195
Face-­to-­face meetings, 231                            Expert Article, The, 185–186
   variation, 59                                        Free Offer, The, 191
First-­degree connection, 51                            InMail Video, The, 194
First-­degree direct connection, 183                    New In-­Role Message, The, 194
Follow-­up message, audio voice notes (usage),          Problem Solved, The, 193
          126, 128, 138                                 Referral, The, 187
Free Offer, The                                         ROI Number, The, 189
   audio message script, 137                            Straight to the Point, The, 188
   InMail sales template, 191                           Testimonial, The, 190
Free Trial (message), usage, 92–93                   InMail Video, The (InMail sales template), 194
Funding, receiving, 162                              Insights, value, 137
                                                     Instagram, usage, 167
G                                                    Instant messaging, 239
Gifting, power, 139                                  Internal introduction, providing, 111
Going to the Same Event (message),                   Introduction, The (video sales message script), 160
         usage, 111–112                              Introduction (message), usage, 84–85


H                                                    L
Headline, creation, 234–235                          Letters, sending, 202
“Here’s MY Calendar Link” message, 43, 44f, 45       Light message, usage, 88

                                                  269
                                               Index




LinkedIn                                              creation, 232
   activities, 242–243                                headline, creation, 234–235
   advice, 219                                        link, addition, 223, 228
   audio voice messages. See Audio voice              “My Network” section, examination, 96
         messages.                                    photo, usage, 229
   audio voice notes. See Audio voice notes.          recommendations, 235
   content, creation/sharing, 16                      skills/endorsements, 235
   groups, problems, 99                               summary section, usage, 234
   InMail. See InMails.                               URL, customisation, 229–230
   invitation (acceptance), personal note             viewing, 107
         (inclusion), 69                              views, examination (regularity), 107–108, 225
   leveraging, 203, 242                               visiting, 105
   network, daily growth, 97                          work experience, listing, 235–236
   Sales Navigator. See Sales Navigator.           LinkedIn Profile Video, The (video sales
   time expenditure, 252                                     message script), 163–164
   video messages. See Video messages; Video          personalisation, 164
         sales message script.                     LinkedIn Recommended You (message),
LinkedIn messages                                            usage, 96–97
   advice, 117                                     Links, recordkeeping, 222
   aggressiveness, avoidance, 73, 77               Looking for Leadership Insight (message),
   brevity, avoidance, 41–42, 42f                            usage, 90–91
   case study document, attachment
         (possibility), 92                         M
   excess, problem, 31–35                          Media, attachment, 234
   goal, 82–84                                     Missed Call (message), usage, 115–116
   information, loading (avoidance), 74–75         Motivation, growth, 4
   InMail, contrast, 51–53                         Mutual Connection/Referral (message),
   length, avoidance, 39, 40f                              usage, 100–101
   leveraging, 204
   overcomplication, problems, 73
                                                   N
   personalisation, 22, 56, 82
                                                   Network
   power, 18
                                                     growth, 243
   response
                                                     research/qualification, 114–115
      absence, 21
                                                   Networking, key event attendance
      rate, increase, 23
                                                            (importance), 112
   sending
                                                   New In-­Role Message, The (InMail sales
      fear/absence, 3–4
                                                            template), 192
      timing, 55
                                                   Newsletter, initiation, 224
   seven-­figure LinkedIn message, 65
                                                   Notification bell, location, 154
   softer language, success, 83
   templates
      learning, 80                                 O
      types, 81                                    Offer, value/knowledge/insight, 94
LinkedIn profile                                   Official referral, 135
   accomplishments/interests, listing,             Opportunity
         236                                         celebration, 218
   articles/activity, presence, 234                  conversation, 207
   background image, usage, 233                      qualification, 217
   building, 231                                   Outbound leads, generation, 14
   cover story video, addition, 220–221            Outbound social selling, 13

                                                270
                                                Index




P                                                   Prospecting emails, sending, 122
Pattern interruption, 34                            Prospects
Personal brands, 232                                  conversation, initiation, 72–73
Personalisation, importance/equation, 25, 164         conversion, 102–103
Phone calls, 9                                        differences, 10
   arrangement, 17–18, 111                            directness, requirement, 71
   decision-­maker preferences, 80                    level (increase), personalisation increase
   follow-­up/receiving, 76                                  (requirement), 69–70
   occurrence, 108                                    LinkedIn profiles, visiting, 105
   usage, 201–202, 203                                message
Photo, sharing, 224, 233, 243–244                        backfiring, 100–101
Pipedrive CRM, usage, 222                                sending, 163
Pipelines                                             messaging, scenarios, 208–209
   absence, impact, 217                               methods, 7–8
   building, 217                                      number, maximum (reaching), 12
   denial, 215                                        personalization, 70–71
   feeding, continuation, 217                         posts, links (recordkeeping), 222
   honesty, impact, 215                               potential, qualification, 108
   importance, 213, 216–217                           pre-­qualification, 117–118
   shrinkage, 216                                     reassurance, 187
Pitch message, conversion, 136                        reply, absence (reaction), 199
Pitch slapping, 55                                    research, business value, 26
Planted Seed (audio message script), 134              searching, 247
Posts                                                 treatment, 60
   commenting, 228                                    video message, sending, 222–223
   engagement, 23                                     voice notes, usage, 143
   recognition/compliment, 105–106
   sharing, 200                                     Q
   social post engagement, 244                      QR code, usage, 141, 146
   testimonial post, sharing, 221                   Question, form (usage), 88
   writing, 228–229
Problem Solved, The (InMail sales                   R
         template), 193                             Rapport, building, 17, 209
Problem Solver (message), usage, 87–88              Reachdesk, usage, 139
Profile Research (audio message script),            Real ROI Example (audio message script), 136
         134–135                                    Recent Activity Observation (message),
Profile View (message)                                       usage, 105–106
   sending/reply, 108                               Referral process, 236
   usage, 106–108                                   Referral, The
Proposal, presentation, 76–77                         audio message script, 135
Prospecting                                           InMail sales template, 185
   activity, 242                                      video sales message script, 165
   audio voice notes, effectiveness, 128            Relationships, building, 167
   channels/platforms/tools, 9                      Relevance, importance/equation, 25
   gifting, power, 139                              Replies, absence (reasons), 21
   key event attendance, importance, 112            Research
   maze, 8–10, 8f                                     advanced research, 28–29
   messages, advice, 133–134                          content, defining, 29–30
   opportunity, 102, 216–218                          depth, 28


                                                 271
                                               Index




Research (continued)                               Second-­degree connection, Connect option, 68
  importance/equation, 25                          Sendoso, usage, 139
  locations, 27–29                                 Senior decision-­makers, ROI introduction
  relevance, ensuring, 162                                   (usage), 86
Research Reference, The (video sales message       Seven-­figure LinkedIn message, 65
        script), 161–162                              scene, setting, 65
Research (message), usage, 114–115                 Shared LinkedIn Group (message), usage, 98–99
Revenue, generation, 106                           Sharing Content (message), usage, 113
ROI Introduction (message), usage, 85–87           Similar Company Insight, The (video sales
ROI Number, The (InMail sales template), 189                 message script), 164
ROI Question (message), usage, 104–105             small to medium-­sized employers (SMEs),
                                                             selling, 65–66
S                                                  Social marketing, 15
Sales                                              Social media
   absence, pipeline absence (impact), 217            enjoyment, 248
   celebration, 218                                   profiles, 232
   closing, 246                                       usage, 10, 242–243
   conversations, initiation, 208                        effectiveness, 246
   desire, 11                                      Social post engagement, 244
   discussion, 17                                  Social profiles, attitude, 231
   emails, variation, 59                           Social selling, 241
   focus, 245                                         advice, 227-­230
   honesty/upfrontness, power, 98                     basics, 245
   love, 4                                            dance, 56–57
   managers, honesty, 218                             inbound-­generating activity, comparison, 13
   opportunity                                        opportunity creation, 77–78
      celebration, 215–216                            outbound-­lead-­generating platform,
      closing, 202                                           ­potential, 13–14
      creation, 18                                    phone/cold calling, contrast, 77, 204
      generation, 215–216                             process, 78–79
   pipelines, 213–214                                 push, 14
   reality, 11–12                                     stigma, 203
   representative, connection, 17                     success, 248
   success, pipeline honesty (impact), 215            usage, 18
   teams, leading, 213                             Social Selling Podcast, The (Best-­Mitchell), 169
   value, 208                                      Soft call to action (soft CTA), 144
      research duration, comparison, 27            Softer language, success, 83
   video messages, usage, 153                      Soft introduction-­style message, 87
Sales development representatives (SDRs)           Spam folder, email delivery, 93
   hiring, 193                                     Spam messages, dislike, 37–38
   training, 141                                   Spamming, 55
Sales email, crafting, 75–76                       Spammy messages, defining/avoidance, 38,
Sales Navigator                                               72, 115, 183
   advice, 219–224                                 Spammy pitches, avoidance, 45
   usage, 174, 179–180                             Sponsor, promotion, 136
Salespeople, training, 4–5                         Spray and pray, 55
Sales pitch                                        Straight-­to-­pitch approach, 47
   avoidance, 71                                   Straight to the Point (InMail sales template), 190
   sending, question, 46                           Subject lines, usage, 221–222


                                                272
                                                Index




Subtitles/captions, usage, 89                         sending, 169, 170–176, 223
Summary section, usage, 230                           sharing, 154
                                                      subtitles/captions, usage, 89
T                                                     usage, 24, 88–89
Targets, reaching (opportunities), 214–215               fear, overcoming, 150–151
Template, usage (problem), 26                         value, 150
Testimonial post, sharing, 221                        vanity, impact, 171
Testimonial, The (InMail sales template), 190       Video sales messages scripts, 159
Text-­based messages, sending                         Expert Insight, The, 165–166
         (limitations), 23–24                         Introduction, The, 160
Third-­degree connection, Message button              LinkedIn Profile Video, The, 163–164
         (usage), 68                                  positive tone, usage, 160
Thoughtful Gift, The                                  Referral, The, 165
   audio message script, 139                          Research Reference, The, 161–162
   deep research, requirement, 167                    research, relevance (ensuring), 162
   video sales message script, 167                    Similar Company Insight, The, 166
TikTok, usage, 167                                    Thoughtful Gift, The, 167
Tone of voice, friendliness, 144                      Website Browse, The, 162–163
Toys “R” Us, failure, 239                             Whiteboard, The, 160–161
Training video, value, 137                          Videos, sharing, 229
Transactional purchase, 207                         Video, usage, 239
Twitter, usage, 167                                 Vidyard, usage, 162–163, 175
                                                    Voicemails, usage, 110
                                                    Voice notes
U
                                                      personalisation, 144
Upfrontness, power, 98, 103
                                                      prospect dislike, 145
URL, customisation, 229–230
                                                      script, creation, 143
                                                      sending, simplicity, 142
V                                                     usage, 24, 121, 142–146
Video DMs, usage (opportunity), 174
Video messages, 149
                                                    W
  advantage, 89
                                                    Webinar, usage/value, 136, 137
  advice, 174
                                                    Website Browse, The (video sales message
  automation tools, 171–172
                                                            script), 162–163
  background, simplicity, 173
                                                    Whiteboard, The (video sales message
  brevity, importance, 172
                                                            script), 160–161
  camera
                                                      creativity, 161
     addressing, 172
                                                    Whiteboard, usage, 173, 174
     lens, cleaning, 174
                                                    Words, usage (softness), 83
  content, uncertainty, 171
                                                    Work experience, listing, 235–236
  effectiveness, 149
                                                    Would You Like an Ebook (message), usage, 95–96
  eye contact, importance, 166
                                                    Written messages
  name, stating, 172
                                                      advice, 117
  performance, 156
                                                      reply, 156–157
  personalisation, 170
  pitching, control, 172
  reciprocity, 171                                  Y
  replies, 155                                      You’re Using Our Competitor (message)
  sales, conclusion, 153                              upfrontness/honesty, 103
  script, 175–176                                     usage, 103–104


                                                 273
    WILEY END USER LICENSE
          AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s eb-
ook EULA.
